༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
WOOKG02837
ImageGroup:
12KG211120
LCCN:
n/a
ISBN:
n/a
Title:
རྒྱུད་བླ་མ་
rgyud bla ma
Author:
མིཏྲེཡནཐ
maitreyanatha
Descriptor:
n/a
Original Publication:
In/a;n/a
Place:
[san francisco, ca]
Publisher:
khyentse foundation
Date:
c 2007
Volume:
1
Total Volumes:
1
TBRC Pages:
2
Introductory Pages:
n/a
Text Pages:
n/a
Scanning Information:
Scanned at Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, 150 West 17th St, New York City, NY
10011, US. Comments: 3/2020



BUDDHA NATURE
Mahayana Uttaratantra Shastra
By Arya Maitreya
With Commentary by
Dzongsar Jamyang Khyentse Rinpoche



BUDDHA-NATURE
༄༅། །ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་བཞུགས་སོ།
MAHAYANA-UTTARATANTRA-SHASTRA
By Arya Maitreya
With Commentary by
DZONGSAR JAMYANG KHYENTSE RINPOCHE



BUDDHA-NATURE
༄༅། །ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་བཞུགས་སོ།
Mahayana-Uttaratantra-Shastra
By Arya Maitreya
With Commentary by
Dzongsar Jamyang Khyentse Rinpoche
Given at the Centre d'Études de Chanteloube
Dordogne, France
2003-2004
Edited by Alex Trisoglio
© 2007 by Siddhartha's Intent
All rights reserved. No part of this text may be reproduced in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from Siddhartha's Intent
KHYENTSE
FOUNDATION
The preparation of this text has been supported by the Khyentse Foundation
PRINTED IN CANADA



Maitreya



EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION
Arya Maitreya's Mahayana-Uttaratantra-Shastra is one of the most important
teachings on Buddha-nature and enlightenment. It is revered by Buddhist
masters as a very special text, one of the five great teachings given by Lord
Maitreya to Asanga, and part of the third turning of the wheel of the Dharma.
Within the traditional Buddhist shedras for monastic education, it is often taught
as the final text in the curriculum, and many masters say it can be considered a
bridge between the sutras and tantra. It provides an important philosophical
foundation for understanding the workings of the Buddhist path, particularly for
Vajrayana practitioners. We are particularly fortunate to have these teachings by
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche, rich with his usual clarity, warmth, humour and
wisdom because, despite its beauty and profundity, this text is rarely taught in
the West, and there are few translations.
Rinpoche gave these teachings on the Uttaratantra at the Centre d'Études de
Chanteloube in Dordogne, France during the summers of 2003 and 2004, after
completing a four-year teaching cycle on Chandrakirti's Madhyamakavatara. He
has often emphasised the value of a grounding in the Madhyamika or 'Middle
Way' philosophy of emptiness, as without this foundation beginners can easily
misunderstand Buddha's teaching that all sentient beings have Buddha-nature.
For example, many of us who have grown up in a Western cultural context can
easily confuse Buddha-nature with ideas like God or a personal soul or essence.
These teachings allow us to dispel these kinds of misunderstanding. And despite
their very different presentations, both the Madhyamika and Uttaratantra are
teachings on the Buddhist view of emptiness. As Rinpoche says, “You could say
that when Nagarjuna explains the Prajñaparamita, he concentrates more on its
'empty' aspect (“form is emptiness" in the Heart Sutra), whereas when Maitreya
explains the same thing, he concentrates more on the 'ness' aspect ("emptiness
is form“)." In showing us how emptiness and Buddha-nature are different ways
of talking about the same thing, this text gives us the grounding we need to
understand Buddha-nature.
In this way, the Uttaratantra gives us another way to understand the Four Seals
that comprise the Buddhist view, which Rinpoche teaches in his book "What
Makes You Not a Buddhist". It also offers a way to make sense of what modern
physics has discovered about the magically "full" quality of "empty" space (e.g.
vacuum particles and quantum optics). But like all Buddhist philosophy, it is not
intended simply to provoke an academic discussion that we leave behind as we
return to our everyday lives. It is taught as a path for us to attain liberation. For
practitioners, the Uttaratantra clearly explains what it means to accumulate merit
and purify defilements, and it offers a safety net to protect our path from falling
into all--too-common eternalist or nihilist extremes. It also tackles many of the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Introduction



basic questions that practitioners ask as they consider the nature of the path,
questions like: What is the ultimate destination of this path? Who is this person
travelling on the path? What are the defilements that are eliminated on the path?
What is experience of enlightenment like? Rinpoche answers these questions and
many others in this commentary on the Uttaratantra-Shastra.
Contents
For ease of study and reference, Rinpoche's commentary on the text is presented
in its entirety in the first part of this book, followed by questions & answers that
are grouped into thematic categories. There is also a glossary with a list of
Tibetan words and phrases, and an index. The book has the following structure:
Table of contents
Root text & Rinpoche's commentary
Questions and Answers
Glossary: Tibetan and Sanskrit words & phrases
Index
Translations
Rinpoche's commentary is presented together with the verses of the Tibetan root
text and two different translations into English, respectively by Ken & Katia
Holmes (first) and Rosemarie Fuchs (second, in italics). Having both translations
offers the opportunity to explore contrasting interpretations, which will provide
valuable insights for non-Tibetan speakers. These translations may be found in:
"The Changeless Nature: The Ultimate Mahayana Treatise on the
Changeless Continuity of the True Nature", translated by Ken & Katia
Holmes, (Karma Drubgyud Darjay Ling, Second edition, 1985), Copyright
K. & C.M.S.A. Holmes.
"Buddha-nature: The Mahayana Uttaratantra Shastra with Commentary,
with explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche, translated by
Rosemarie Fuchs (Snow Lion Publications, Ithaca NY, 2000), Copyright
Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche and Rosemarie Fuchs.
Tibetan terms
In these teachings, Rinpoche frequently uses Tibetan terms, not least because
there is often no straightforward English equivalent. These terms are included in
the main body of the text, where the first occurrence of a Tibetan term includes
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Introduction



an approximate English pronunciation (e.g. draldrey). To accommodate readers
with some knowledge of Tibetan, there is a glossary listing Tibetan and Sanskrit
words and phrases, including Tibetan script (dbu can) and Wylie transliterations.
For Sanskrit terms, a modified transliteration has been used that omits the
diacritical marks adopted by scholars; however the entries in the glossary provide
full diacritical marks
Comments & feedback
I would very much appreciate your comments and feedback on this text, and your
suggestions for how it might be improved and made more valuable. Please email
me at: alex@khyentsefoundation.org
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Luc Dierckx for preparing the Tibetan root text, Choekyong
Palga Rinpoche for proofreading the Tibetan root text, Jakob Leschly and Steven
Goodman for their help with Tibetan and Sanskrit terms, Lane Fagan for editorial
assistance, and Kelly Roberts and Regina Weilhart for their help with design. I
would also like to express my appreciation to everyone at Khyentse Foundation
and Siddhartha's Intent for their work in supporting Rinpoche's aspirations and
activities.
I would also like to thank everyone who helped with the organisation and
administration of the teachings at the Centre d'Études de Chanteloube, and
everyone at the Padmakara Translation Group. In particular, I would like to thank
Jigme Khyentse Rinpoche and Pema Wangyal Rinpoche for their tireless activity in
propagating the dharma in Chanteloube and around the world.
Finally, I would like to express my deep gratitude to Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche
for his teachings.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Introduction



Khyentse Foundation
"Buddha Nature: Mahayana Uttaratantra Shastra by Arya Maitreya with
Commentary by Dzongsar Jamyang Khyentse Rinpoche" is published by Khyentse
Foundation, a non-profit organization founded by Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche
in 2001. The Foundation's core purpose is to establish a system of patronage
that supports individuals and institutions engaged in the study and practice of
the Buddha's vision of wisdom and compassion.
KHYENTSE
FOUNDATION
The objective of the Foundation's Publication Fund is to make precious texts
such as this one readily available to all those who wish to study the
Buddhadharma. The Publication Fund also supports both text-preservation
efforts and translation initiatives that aim to improve translation standards of
Buddhist texts.
The Publication Fund is one of Khyentse Foundation's five primary means of
supporting the dharma. The other four ways are the Endowment Fund for
Monastic Education; the Khyentse Foundation Scholarship Fund; the
establishment of Endowed Chairs of Buddhist Studies at major universities; and
Buddhist Education Programs. All five projects have been initiated by Dzongsar
Khyentse Rinpoche.
In addition to this publication, Khyentse Foundation has published "Introduction
to the Middle Way: Chandrakirti's Madhyamakavatara with Commentary by
Dzongsar Jamyang Khyentse Rinpoche" (2003), and “Longchen Nyingtik Practice
Manual: Advice on How to Practice" (2004).
Digital versions of these texts are available free of charge to those who send a
formal request to publications@khyentsefoundation.org. Please include your
name, the city and country you live in, and, for the Ngöndro commentary, the
name of the lama from whom you received transmission to do the practice.
Khyentse Foundation is an all-volunteer organization that depends entirely on
the generosity of private donors. Because of its 501(C)3 charitable organization
status, all donations to Khyentse Foundation are tax deductible to the fullest
extent of the law in the United States. If you wish to offer support or need
further information, please contact:
Khyentse Foundation
P.O. Box 156648
San Francisco, CA 94115 USA
+1 (415) 788-8048
info@khyentsefoundation.org
www.khyentsefoundation.org
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Introduction



Siddhartha's Intent
The copyright of this publication, as with all of Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche's
teaching materials, belongs to Siddhartha's Intent (SI), an international network
of Buddhist centres founded by Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche.
SIDDHARTHA'S INTENT
Siddhartha's Intent began in Australia in 1986 with the formation of Siddhartha's
Intent Southern Door. It has since expanded to include centres in the United
States, Canada, Germany, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Bhutan and India. All are officially
registered in their respective countries as churches, societies, or charities
founded with the sole intention of preserving and fostering the Buddhadharma.
Khyentse Rinpoche has termed Siddhartha's Intent a "monastery without walls".
Each independent Sl organization strives to fulfil Rinpoche's intentions in a
unique way. Si international, in Canada, produces and distributes Rinpoche's
recorded teachings, maintains written archives of his talks, and provides support
for Sea to Sky Retreat Centre. SI Southern Door supports Vajradhara Gonpa,
publishes the Gentle Voice newsletter, and is affiliated with Buddha Down Under,
a newly formed Buddhist group in New Zealand. Si Taipei coordinates Dzongsar
Khyentse Rinpoche's teachings in Taiwan and maintains a practice centre for the
sangha. Si India operates Deer Park Institute, a non-monastic college following
the Nalanda University tradition, designed to re-create the spirit of classical
Indian wisdom studies.
The Si organizations are bound together by their intent to actively participate in
the study and practice of the Buddhadharma to achieve enlightenment. This was
Siddhartha's intent. The achievement of this aim will increase the awareness and
understanding of Buddhist principles, surpassing the limits of cultures and
traditions.
www.siddharthasintent.org
Khyentse Foundation and Siddhartha's Intent are sister organizations founded by
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche to support the study and practice of Buddhadharma
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Introduction



Table Of Contents
1
Introduction and Preliminaries.
2003 Teachings: Day 1 - Introduction
Day 2 - Introduction ....
1
8
The First Vajra Point: Buddha.
13
The Second Vajra Point: Dharma.
20
24
The Third Vajra Point: Sangha..
Day 3 - Introduction.
The Three Refuges
26
29
33
The Last Four Vajra Points
The Four Paradoxes
34
The Fourth Vajra Point: The Element...
Day 4 - Introduction .....
37
38
40
41
42
43
44
48
49
50
51
52
The Ten Aspects (of Buddha-nature)
#1: Essence
#2: Cause
The four obscurations that wrap the kham.
#3: Result...
#4: Action/Function
#5: Container/Endowment
#6: Entry...
#7: Occasions.
#8: All-pervasive
#9: Unchanging
Day 5 - Introduction
The example of the lotus growing in the water
#10: Inseparable......
The example of the sun and its rays.
The example of the painters
Day 6 - Introduction ..
The Nine Examples (of essence and defilements)
Example #1: The Buddha and the Lotus..
Example #2: The Honey and the Bees
Example #3: The Grain and the Husk
Example #4: The Gold and the Filth....
Day 7 - Introduction ...
53
61
63
70
70
73
76
78
79
81
82
83
88
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Table of Contents
i



Example #5: The Treasure and the Earth
Example #6: The Shoot and the Fruit-skin
Example #7: The Statue and the Tattered Rag
Example #8: The Chakravartin and the Woman
Example #9: The Golden Image and the Clay Mould
Day 8 - Introduction
Day 9 - Introduction
90
92
93
95
96
99
113
127
The Fifth Vajra Point - Enlightenment...
2004 Teachings: Day 1 - Introduction.
Day 2 - Introduction
Day 3 - Introduction
133
150
169
The Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
180
The Ten Powers
182
186
188
The Four Fearlessnesses.
Day 4 - Introduction
The Eighteen Distinctive Qualities.
The Fruit of Maturation (the 32 Major Marks).
How the examples and the qualities complement each other.
190
193
199
206
206
The Seventh Vajra Point: Activity.
Day 5 - Introduction ....
The Nine Examples for the Buddha's Activity
Example #1: Indra's Reflection On The Lapis Lazuli Floor.
Day 6 - Introduction .....
Example #2: The Heavenly Drum.
Example #3: The Cloud
Day 7 - Introduction
Example #4: Brahma.
Example #5: The Sun.
Example #6: The Wishfulfilling Jewel
Day 8 - Introduction
Example #7: The Echo
Example #8: The Sky/Space.
Example #9: The Earth
Day 9 - Introduction
Day 10 - Introduction
216
217
219
225
232
236
239
242
247
249
250
251
252
261
276
287
Questions & Answers.
The Fourth Vajra Point: The Element.....
Do animals have Buddha-nature?..
Do plants and stones have Buddha-nature?.....
287
287
287
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Table of Contents
11



293
295
297
299
299
302
306
306
313
Kham and Buddha-nature
Kham and the gross & subtle elements
Buddha-nature, mind & wisdom...
The Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
Is Buddha-nature permanent?
Is Buddha-nature uncompounded?.
The Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
The 32 major marks .....
The activity of the nirmanakaya.
The Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
The reflection in the lapis lazuli floor
Effortlessness
View and Path ...
Blessings & genuine heart of sadness.
How does prayer work?
Uttaratantra and the Vajrayana
Why does the path have two accumulations?
Defilements, emotions & the origin of suffering
Are there other sentient beings?...
Study & Practice.......
Buddha-nature & atman in Hinduism
Practice and the Four Seals
315
315
320
322
322
324
325
327
328
337
338
347
350
Tibetan Words & Phrases.
351
Index
367
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Table of Contents



INTRODUCTION AND PRELIMINARIES
Day 1
Introduction
Motivation and attitude:
compassion and
renunciation
Nagarjuna and Maitreya:
the two traditions of
commentary on wisdom
and the Prajnaparamita
Since you are listening to a Mahayana shastra or commentary, it is important that
you should also do so with the Mahayana motivation and attitude, which is
principally having compassion towards all sentient beings and revulsion towards
samsara. And to generate some kind of revulsion towards samsara, you must
realise the value of Buddha and his wisdom, and the futility of samsaric life. This
is a very important text for Mahayana students, a very important commentary on
the Prajñaparamita. Some of us have heard teachings on the Madhyamika in the
past, which come from Nagarjuna's tradition. By contrast, this text comes from
Maitreya's tradition. Both commentators are elucidating wisdom or prajña in
their commentaries - primordial or transcendental wisdom. And if you are a
serious Buddhist student, you will know that wisdom is the most important thing
in Buddhism, especially in the Mahayana.
In Buddhism, wisdom is
the foundation for all
action
In his prayers, Maitreya says that even when we talk about things like ethics and
morality, they should always be accompanied by or based on wisdom. We often
hear such things in Mahayana texts. For instance, in the ninth chapter of his
Bodhicharyavatara, Shantideva writes that the Buddha teaches all the branches of
Bodhisattva activity such as generosity and the rest for wisdom. Similarly, in
Chandrakirti's Madhyamakavatara, we read that a so-called act of generosity can
only be called the perfection of generosity when is based on wisdom. Therefore
actions such as generosity, discipline and morality are all secondary in Buddhism.
This is a very important statement. It's because of this that you will not find any
Buddhist text saying that as a Buddhist your practice is that you must visit Bodh
Gaya once during your lifetime. Likewise, Buddhists don't single out a particular
kind of meat like chicken that you cannot eat as a Buddhist. You won't find
anything like that. We don't say that a Buddhist man can have four wives.
There's no Buddhist marriage ceremony or divorce ceremony. There may be
some auspicious verses and some mantras here and there, but you won't find
anything like this as an ultimate teaching in the sutras. Having said this, we're
not denying or negating morality and so forth. In fact, the Buddha is the
embodiment of the morally perfect being. But moral actions must always be
based on wisdom. So, what exactly is this important wisdom that we are talking
about here? We study it intellectually like this to a certain extent, but true
recognition or achievement of this wisdom only comes as a result of the
accumulation of merit and purification of defilements.
For Nagarjuna, wisdom is
the state beyond all
extremes, i.e. emptiness
If we seek to explain it with a greater emphasis on Nagarjuna's tradition, which is
quite popular, then wisdom is referred to as a kind of 'mind'. Maybe I shouldn't
use the word 'mind', but rather a state that is beyond all kinds of extremes. So
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha 1



we are talking about going beyond extremes, becoming non-extremist. But this
is not that easy! When we talk about going beyond extremes, we're not just
talking about things like abandoning suicide bombing, for instance. According
to Nagarjuna's tradition, that doesn't necessarily mean you've gone beyond
extremes. According to Nagarjuna, if your mind is engrossed - when it has a
strong grip or fixation (dzinpa) towards something as a truly existent
phenomenon - then you have already become an extremist. This is why, if you
study the followers of Nagarjuna's tradition like Chandrakirti and Aryadeva, you
will hear a lot of information about emptiness. Let's save Maitreya for later!
Since there are many Nyingmapas present, I should behave here - I should be
careful! Anyway, this year all you Nyingmapas should be quite well disposed
towards me, as I'm going to use Mipham Rinpoche's commentary, and also
hopefully, if I have the capacity to understand and explain it to you, I will extract
some of the teachings from the commentary, the sengey naro or "Lion's Roar", so
I guess you will be hearing a lot of Shentongpa stuff!
For Garab Dorje, wisdom
is a mind or cognizer
without object, a
completely unfabricated
mind
Garab Dorje's
'unfabricated mind' and
Nagarjuna's temptiness'
are referring to the same
thing
Now what is wisdom according to Garab Dorje? I don't know much about this -
just a little. It's mostly guesswork. All these masters are talking about the same
thing, but they talk about it in a different way. Their way or style of approaching
the subject is different. Garab Dorje identifies wisdom as the mind without an
object. Again, it's not really the 'mind', but a state - 'cognition', or we could say
a 'cognizer' without an object. Anyway, for now, for the sake of communication,
we can call it the mind at its height of absolute normality, a mind that is
completely unfabricated. I guess that's the way that Garab Dorje points it out.
And he's referring to the same thing as Nagarjuna. But this ‘normality' - now
that's a very big word! Throughout the mahasandhi teachings, there are endless
teachings on this word. It is one of the most important words. In our human
world, we actually don't have a good definition of 'normality'. We are usually
talking about abnormality slightly reduced. I'm just telling you about all these
different approaches in order to beautify Lord Maitreya's approach.
A path seems to imply a
goal, but in Mahayana,
there is no goal
The path is like peeling
layers of skins, and
finding there is no seed
inside
So let's go back to emptiness now. Usually in our human mind, as soon as we
talk about a path, it's inevitable that we have to think about its finishing line -
some kind of result or goal. And now we are talking about Buddhism, so
naturally we are talking about a path. But you know, in the Mahayana there is no
goal. In the Prajñaparamita-sutra for instance, we hear that "Form is emptiness,
emptiness is form. No eyes, no nose..." and all that. This is common to the
Mahayana teachings. There's nothing to obtain. And there's no "no nothing" to
obtain. The Mahayana path is more like peeling layers of skin and then finally
finding that there is no seed inside. But this isn't a disappointment at all. You
know why? It's because these layers of skins are what bind us. We have to
obtain liberation from the skins! But this is difficult because we love our skins!
When we are children, a sandcastle is very important to us. Then when we're
about 16, a skateboard is very important, and by then the sandcastle is a rotten
skin. There is no need for any teachings on meditation, as the sandcastle has
We need liberation from
all the skins that bind us,
but we love these skins!
How the 16-year old is
liberated from the child's
skin of 'sandcastle', etc.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
2



The path is an inner skin
that we use to peel away
outer skins
already been renounced automatically! Then when we're in our 30s and 40s,
money, cars and relationships replace the skateboard. And then when we're
about 60, these things are replaced by tablecloths and saltcellars! These are all
layers of skins. And more importantly, even the path is a skin. The paths that
we practice are all layers of skin that we use to help us in the process of peeling
the other skins. The inner skin helps us to think about the outer skin and
motivates us to peel it. But ultimately in the Mahayana path, you have to be free
from all systems, all skins.
When all skins are peeled,
we obtain the result of
absence or elimination
(draldrey). This is the
subject of this text
This absence is not
nothingness, like the
exhaustion of a fire. It
has qualities (yönten)
So, now we must ask what happens when all the skins have been peeled off.
What is left? Are we talking about a total negation like the exhaustion of a fire or
the evaporation of moisture? Is it something like that? No, we're talking about a
'result of elimination' or 'result of freedom' (draldrey). Here we will be influenced
by Kunkhyen Mipham Rinpoche, and this draldrey is going to be our main subject
for the next two years: the result of freedom' or 'result of elimination'. Let me
give you some really bad examples of what this means, as it might help. For
instance - I'll give you a really bad example - don't take it too literally. At the
moment, this tent is filled with all of us. Then if we all go out, the tent becomes
absent of us. But that absence is not a non-entity, like an evaporation of
moisture or the exhaustion of fire. It has a quality (yönten), and because of this
quality, we can come back and sit inside the tent again. This is a difficult one to
understand! Let me give you another example. Imagine that your window is
dirty and then you clean it. You wash the dirt, and the absence of dirt is labelled
as the clean window. There's nothing else. This phenomenon that we are calling
a 'clean window', the quality that is the absence of dirt (drima dralwey yönten) is
not something that we produced by cleaning the dirt. This is a very Shentongpa
way of explaining things. I don't think we should even call it a 'clean window',
because the window in its original state has never been stained by the extremes
of either dirt or clean. But nevertheless, the process of getting rid of the dirt can
be labelled as the emergence of the clean window.
When we wash a window,
we label the absence of
dirt as 'clean window', but
this isn't something we
produced by cleaning the
dirt
We establish Buddha-
nature as the 'quality that
is the absence of
defitement'. Otherwise it
might end up becoming a
truly existing soul or
atman
Basically we're talking about Buddha-nature. We have to be really careful when
establishing the idea of this Buddha-nature, otherwise it might end up becoming
something like atman or a truly existing soul and so on. That's why we talk
about it as a quality that is the absence of the dirt. I'm telling you to be careful
because the Mahayana shastras talk about the qualities of this 'result of
freedom': the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the 32 major marks, the 80
minor marks, and so on. If you're not careful, then you might start to think more
theistically again. But all these are qualities of the absence of dirt (drima dra/wey
yönten).
In explaining emptiness,
Nagarjuna emphasises the
aspect of 'empty' and
Maitreya emphasises the
'ness'
Let me make a very simplistic and rather bad summary. You could say that when
Nagarjuna explains the Prajñaparamita, he concentrates more on its 'empty'
aspect, whereas when Maitreya explains the same thing, he concentrates more on
the 'ness' aspect - the 'empty and the 'ness'. And this ‘ness' is what we are
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
3



going to talk about for two years. It's very important, because if we miss out this
'ness' bit, we cannot establish the enlightened qualities such as the 32 major
marks, 80 minor marks and so on. Now I think that I am really talking like a
Shentongpa!
Thus we understand that
the Buddha's enlightened
qualities are
uncompounded without
falling into the theistic
extreme
If you are able to understand this a little, then you will not be shocked when you
hear that the enlightened qualities (sangyey gyi yönten) are uncompounded,
whereas if you don't know that the qualities are the result of freedom (drima
dralwey yönten), then it becomes very theistic when you hear that the Buddha's
qualities are uncompounded (dumajey). When we talk about something being
'compounded', then we're talking about extremes. Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti
talk about going beyond extremes, such as the four extremes, and they use
terms like 'free from extremes or fabrications' (trödra). Maitreya uses words like
uncompounded' (dumajey). For me, they have the same meaning.
Buddha-nature is the
main subject of this text
It might seem simpler
than emptiness, but it's
just as easily
misunderstood
Buddha-nature is the main subject of this text. Basically, if you want to know
about Buddha-nature, then this is the text that you have to study. I get the
sense that people think that emptiness is difficult to understand, but they
somehow overlook Buddha-nature, thinking that it's easier to understand. But
it's easily misunderstood, just as emptiness is easily misunderstood. People who
have a nihilist habit - right wingers, those who wear berets, chew cigars and
enthusiastically adopt an attitude that's impossible to fit into society, those who
consider themselves intellectuals - might pretend that they love Nagarjuna and
his words. But they can completely miss the point and become useless. And
then there are people who have eternalist habitual patterns - leftists, who have
lots of wind chimes in their homes, who try all kinds of essential oils, avoid
wearing fur, and look down on smokers - they might pretend that they
understand Maitreya. Buddha-nature is very good for touchy-feely people like
Californians! But they can completely miss the point of Buddha-nature.
In the Madhyamika,
emptiness is also the
result of elimination, of
notions of self in that
case. But it is not like the
exhaustion of fire or
evaporation of water
Let's return to draldrey, where dral means freedom, absence, liberation or
elimination - 'elimination' is a good word - and dreybu is the effect or the result.
In the Madhyamika you also hear a lot about dral or elimination, because we have
to deconstruct the aggregates and the notion of self. But this elimination is not
like an exhaustion of fire or evaporation of moisture or water. It's like the clean
window that we were talking about earlier. This effect of eliminating the
extremes (dreybu) will be taught extensively in the Uttaratantra. But there's one
thing we have to understand. When we talk about the result of elimination
(draldrey), then automatically our human mind thinks we are talking about
something that comes afterwards - first there is elimination and then its effect,
so to speak. But here we are not talking about that at all, because then again we
would fall into the eternalist or theistic extreme. This is difficult. When we talk
about 'elimination', we are talking about having something to eliminate. But in
the Prajñaparamita, we understand that there's nothing to eliminate, and that is
the big elimination. The result of that elimination isn't obtained later, as it's
*Elimination implies
having something to
eliminate, but the big
elimination is realising
that there is nothing to
eliminate
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha



The result of elimination
is always there, so it is
called continuum or gyü
always there. This is why it's called gyü, as in gyü lama, where gyü means
'continuum' or tantra in Sanskrit. That's the best word the translators have been
able to come up with.
This quality continues
during ground, path and
result. The window
continues, free from the
concepts of dirt and
'freedom from dirt'
This quality continues during the ground, during the path, and during the result.
The window continues - before the dirt, while the dirt is being washed away, and
after the cleaning is complete. The window continues, and it has always been
free from the concept of 'dirt' and therefore also from the concept of 'freedom
from dirt'. For those of you who are hearing the Mahayana teachings for the first
time, you may already be getting a little frustrated! But if you want to continue,
don't worry too much because the text will explain all these ideas gradually.
Today I'm just giving you everything as an introduction.
The Mahayana result is
'beyond aspiration, it is
there already, so there is
no need to aspire for it
In the Mahayana, one of the big slogans is that the result is beyond aspiration
(möpa). You cannot aspire for it. You cannot wish or pray for the result. And
this is because the result of elimination (draldrey) continues all the time. It's
there already, so there's no need to aspire for it. The Mahayana sutras also have
quotations like "whether the Buddhas come or not, the true nature of phenomena
never changes". It has always been like that. It's not as though things have only
been emptiness since Siddhartha said "everything is emptiness" in Varanasi after
years of meditation! It's not like that!
༄༅། །རྒྱ་གར་སྐད་དུ། མ་ཧཱ་ཡ་ན་ཨུཏྟ་ར་ཏནྟཱ་ཤཱསྡུ་
བོད་སྐད་དུ། །ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས། །
སངས་རྒྱས་དང་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ། །
In Sanskrit, mahayanottaratantrashastra,
In Tibetan, tekpa chenpo gyü lamey ten chö.
Homage to all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.
The title: "The Mahayana
commentary on the most
sublime continuum"
So, in the Indian language this is referred to as Mahayana-uttara-tantra-shastra,
and in Tibetan, tekpa chenpo gyü lamey ten chö. Mahayana is the great vehicle,
uttara' means sublime, 'tantra' means continuum and 'shastra' means
commentary. There are many different kinds of continuum, but this is the most
sublime continuum. The problem is that when we talk about a continuum, our
ordinary minds end up thinking that it is something permanent. And it certainly
doesn't help when Maitreya tells us that it is uncompounded, because then we
really think that this continuum is something permanent! There's a lot of
discussion about the definition of 'continuum', which we'll talk about in the
future, maybe next year.
This is a Mahayana text
because it has a greater
view, method and action
Why does this text belong to the Mahayana, the great vehicle? Because it has a
greater view. The view is not only the selflessness of the person. It is the
selflessness of both the person and phenomena. The action is not only
renouncing samsara but renouncing both samsara and nirvana and also helping
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
5



sentient beings. And the method is not limited to mere discipline and morality
and so forth, but it's infinite. The activity is not only to liberate oneself but
aimed to liberate all sentient beings.
The translator's homage
indicates that this text
belongs to the sutras
Before the text begins we have the translator's homage, which is a prostration to
the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, indicating that this text belongs to the sutras
(dodey). Among the three baskets, this is the basket that emphasises meditation.
1
སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་ཚོགས་ཁམས་དང་བྱང་ཆུབ་དང་
། །
ཡོན་ཏན་སངས་རྒྱས་ཕྲིན་ལས་ཐ་མ་སྟེ། །
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀུན་གྱི་ལུས་ནི་མདོར་བསྡུ་ན། །
རྡོ་རྗེ་ཡི་ནི་གནས་བདུན་འདི་དག་གོ 1
The entire body of this treatise can be condensed into the following seven vajra points:
Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, Buddha-nature, enlightenment, qualities and activity.
if condensed, the body of the entire commentary consists of the following seven vajra
points: Buddha, Dharma, the Assembly, the element, enlightenment, qualities and then
Buddha activity.
General summary - the
text contains seven
topics, the seven vajra
points
Now we begin the actual text. First there is a general summary to give us a
general idea of the subject, so that we will not get confused with the different
topics later on. There are seven subjects that will be taught in this text, the
seven vajra points or the seven indestructible points (dorjey nedün). These are:
1. Buddha
1. Buddha
2. Dharma
2. Dharma
3. Sangha
3. Sangha
4. Kham (the element)
4. Kham. How should we translate this word? We were talking about rig and
kham earlier. Perhaps the best word is 'family', like the different Buddha
families. The word rig is a little bit like 'race', 'type' or 'species', a little like
the different kinds of animals like mammals, marsupials, fish, insects and so
on. But by the way, if it is a species, you have to know that it's definitely not
an endangered species! Everybody has it! Tantric people prefer to use the
word 'element' as the translation of kham, as it really works very well in
tantric practice.
This idea of kham or 'element' is quite a big one. Perhaps this isn't the right
time to talk about the five Buddha families - the Buddha family, padma family,
vajra family, ratna family and karma family - as we're not going to talk about
tantra. But recently my teacher Khenpo Appey Rinpoche said something quite
important to me. He said that only the Buddha is considered the supreme
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
6



The Buddha is considered
the supreme teacher, as
all others can only relate
to people through indirect
perception, which is all
guesswork and
generalisation
teacher, and there is a good reason. Every single sentient being has a slightly
different kind of kham or element, although of course all are based on one
main kham, which is the tathagatagarbha (dewar shekpey nyingpo). And as
long as we have even the slightest defilement, then we can only relate to
people with guesswork, with indirect perception. And as soon as we talk, we
can only ever generalise. Our entire system of communication is only
generalisation. Only the Buddha is able to communicate without
generalisation, and therefore only the Buddha can teach someone without any
guesswork.
All concepts, including all
Buddhist teachings like
the 9 yanas and 5 buddha
families are
generalisations, but they
are profound ones!
So all these concepts like 3 yanas, 9 yanas, 5 emotions, 5 buddha families -
they're actually all generalisations. There may be millions of buddha families,
but we never know. We cannot comprehend. So for all of us who are not yet
tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas, what are we doing now when we teach or when we
practice? Are we only ever guessing? Yes. But we can guess well, by making
good generalisations. So when we talk about these 5 emotions and 5 Buddha
families - all these are like very profound guesses! Because after all, there is
only one kham, one element or one family, and that is the Buddha-nature.
For instance, if you are inviting some French guests for dinner, and if you
serve a little red wine and some smelly cheese, then nothing can go
drastically wrong. You will be all right - a good host! And if you have
Americans as your guests, then you need food in large quantities. If there are
two American guests, then if you have at least 40 plates and a few things to
waste, then you will be safe - you'll be OK! So anyway, I guess you now have
some kind of strange or general idea of what this kham is about. It's a big
subject that we will talk about a lot.
5. Enlightenment
5. The fifth subject is enlightenment, which is when this kham, this rig or family,
is absent of defilement.
6. Quality
6. Sixth is the quality of that enlightenment.
7. Activity
7. And finally the Buddha activity.
These are called 'vajra'
points as they cannot be
understood through
ordinary means, only by
self-awareness wisdom
These are the seven vajra points that will be discussed in this text. Why are they
called 'vajra' points? Because ultimately they cannot be understood by ordinary
hearing and contemplation and must be realised by self-awareness wisdom (so
so rang rigpey yeshey).
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
7



2
འདི་དག་རང་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱི་རྗེས་འབྲེལ་བ། །
གོ་རིམས་ཇི་བཞིན་གཟུངས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་མདོར། !
གླེང་གཞི་ལས་ནི་གནས་གསུམ་རིག་བྱ་སྟེ། །
བཞི་ནི་བློ་ལྡན་རྒྱལ་ཆོས་དབྱེ་བ་ལས། །
These are in a natural order, and one should know the first three as deriving from the
introductory and the latter four from the "Wise and Victors' Qualities" chapters of the
Dharanishvararajasutra.
in the above order, which presents them in a logical sequence, these {vajra points)
should be known to be derived from the Sutra Requested by King Dharanishvara. The
{first three stem from its introductory chapter and the flatter four from its chapters) on
the properties of those who possess understanding and the Victorious One.
The seven vajra points are
taught in the
Dharanishvararaja Sutra
The seven vajra points are not something made up by Lord Maitreya, Arya
Maitreya. They were taught in the sutras, particularly the Dharanishvararaja-
sutra, which is also known as the Sutra Requested by King Dharanishvara (zungkyi
gyelpö). The first three vajra points are taught in the introduction of this sutra,
and the remaining four vajra points are taught in the subsequent chapters. Now
some of you may have the text "Buddha Nature", Rosemarie Fuchs' translation of
the Uttaratantra and commentary. I'm won't be teaching from this text, but it
may nevertheless help you, although it may also confuse you a little bit, because
it contains jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thayé's commentary on the Uttaratantra,
which is taught from the point of view of tantra or Vajrayana. I won't be doing
that. I will be only be giving a commentary in the sutra way. But in future, you
should study this in a tantric way.
This teaching is being
given according to the
sutra way, not the tantric
way
Day 2
Introduction
The Uttaratantra is the
last of Lord Maitreya's five
major texts (taught to
Asanga)
The gyü lama, the Uttaratantra, is the last of the five major texts that was taught
by Lord Maitreya to the great Asanga. It was taught in heaven, by the way -
Maitreya is a heavenly creature, a being from the god realm. He received the
crown when Shakyamuni Buddha descended to earth. Some people say that if
you know what to look for, you can tell that that his words are composed in a
slightly beyond-human way.
Only the first of these five
texts has a homage, and
only the last has a
dedication
Buddhist texts usually begin with the author's homage to his or her masters or
deities, which is the traditional homage that comes before writing or teaching
anything. For example, Chandrakirti's Madhyamakavatara pays homage to
compassion. However, in this case, only the first of these five texts contains
homage, the Abhisamaya-alamkara, which is a commentary on the
Prajñaparamita. The other four texts don't have a homage and similarly only the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
8



Uttaratantra, which is the last of the five tests, has a dedication. Some people
think that the word uttara also means 'last' in Sanskrit.
Apart from the
Abhisamaya-alamkara
and Uttaratantra, many
scholars think the other
three of Maitreya's five
texts are Chittamatrin
rather than Madhyamika
The Uttaratantra is
accepted as Madhyamika,
but scholars disagree
about whether it is a
provisional or definitive
teaching
Since many of you have received Madhyamika teachings, you will know that the
Madhyamika has two schools - Svatantrika and Prasangika. The Abhisamaya-
alamkara and most of the commentaries from India and Tibet are very much
influenced by the Svatantrika Madhyamika. Only Gorampa, I think, has a
commentary that explains the Abhisamaya-alamkara in the Prasangika style.
Now, out of these five texts - if we exclude the Abhisamaya-alamkara and the
Uttaratantra - many scholars, especially Rangtongpas, think that the other three
texts aren't even Madhyamika texts. They think they are more Chittamatrin. But
Shentongpa masters such as Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen say they are actually the
real Madhyamika, or what they call the shentong uma chenpo. Everyone more or
less accepts the Uttaratantra as a Madhyamika text, but not everyone agrees on
its status. Buddhist teachings are divided into two categories: teachings of
definitive or ultimate meaning (nyeydön) and teachings of expedient meaning
(drangdön). These two are basically the teachings that you can take literally and
those you can't. Many scholars accept the Uttaratantra as nyeydon, but Sakya
Pandita thinks this teaching cannot be taken literally, so it's only expedient or
drangdön. This is a little bit shocking! But he thinks that words like
"uncompounded' and 'permanent' all need to be interpreted - they can't be taken
literally, otherwise there would be no difference between Buddha-nature and
Hindu concepts like atman, prakriti, purusha and all that.
Sakya Pandita thinks it is
provisional, as words like
funcompounded' need
interpretation
The Uttaratantra is often
taught as the last text in
the Buddhist curriculum,
almost as a bridge
between sutra and tantra
I don't know if this applies to all Buddhist schools, but the general rule or
tradition in schools of Buddhist philosophy is that students study Madhyamika
first, because it really helps to deconstruct all kinds of concepts. Madhyamika is
followed by vinaya, metaphysics and all that. And gyü lama, the Uttaratantra, is
taught at a later stage, often as the last text in the Buddhist curriculum, and
many masters of the past say that the Uttaratantra is like a bridge between the
sutras and tantra. For instance, in the Kagyu tradition, the three most important
texts are zab, tak and gyű: first is the Profound Inner Sense (zabmo nangdon),
second is the Hevajra-tantra (takpa nyipa), and finally comes the gyü lama. It's
very nice to see the great efforts that have been made by Khenchen Thrangu
Rinpoche and Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso on the great Uttaratantra.
Students typically
misunderstand 'union'.
Even the union of truth
and non-truth is hard to
understand, let alone
ideas like the union of
space and luminosity
Since I was trained in the Sakya philosophical system, I will have to suppress my
doubts about words like 'uncompounded' and my sarcasm. But the Sakyapas
also have a big burden, because when they talk about space (ying) and luminosity
(ösel), they have to contend with the consequence that luminosity is a
compounded phenomenon (dujey). Sakyapa scholars have to deal with this
question, even though they might not admit it openly. The hardest thing for
students to break through is their misunderstanding of the word 'union', because
the union of truth (denpa) and non-truth (dzünpa) is difficult to understand. But
if you think about it logically, you cannot really separate them. You cannot
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
9



extract or separate the truth and then find the false. And it's even more difficult
to understand the union of space and luminosity. And of course, we still have to
define the words 'space' and 'luminosity'.
The seven vajra points are
taught in several different
sutras
We briefly discussed the seven vajra points in the first stanza, and in the second
stanza Maitreya is saying that they are not something that he made up. The
seven vajra points are actually taught in many sutras. For instance, the three
gems - Buddha, Dharma and Sangha - are taught in thakpey sampa tenpey do,
which can roughly be translated as the Sutra Exposing the Superior Mind. And
kham, the rig or element, is taught in the teldrip mepa, which can be translated as
the Sutra of No Increasing and No Decreasing. The fifth vajra point, which is
enlightenment (changchub), is taught in the Shrimaladevisimhanada-sutra
(paltreng gi do). And the sixth vajra point, quality, is also taught in the Sutra of
No Increasing and No Decreasing. Finally, activity is taught in the Sutra of
Approaching the Infinite and inexpressible Qualities of the Tathagata (de bzhin
bshegs pa'i yon tan dang ye shes bsam gyis my khyab pa'i yul la jug pa bstan pa'i
mdo), something like that.
The seven vajra points are
also taught within a single
sutra, the
Dharanishvararaja - sutra
So the seven vajra points are taught in different sutras, and they are also taught
within one sutra: the Sutra Requested by King Dharanishvara (zungkyi gyelpó), also
known as the “The Explanation of the Great Compassion of the Tathagata". In
the prologue of that sutra, the Buddha taught Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. He
said that the Buddha, Bhagawan, is totally enlightened in the state of the
equanimity of all phenomena. And then he turned the wheel of the Dharma, and
gathered an assembly of students. This is not just a historical account, by the
way. This is very similar to what Shakyamuni Buddha told his followers when he
passed away. When they asked him what to should do, among many other things
he said that followers of Gautama must let people know four things:
Buddha Shakyamuni said
the followers of Gautama
must let people know four
things
- Siddhartha, a normal ordinary human being came to the earth.
- He achieved enlightenment.
- He taught others how he achieved enlightenment.
- He passed into parinirvana.
Buddhists aren't
evangelical. We pray
"may all beings become
Buddha", not "may all
become Buddhists"
Now you should not assume that the Buddha is trying to print a pamphlet in
order to increase the population of Buddhists or something! In our ordinary
prayers, we pray “may all sentient beings become Buddha" but we don't pray,
"May all sentient beings become Buddhists".
The first message, that an ordinary human being called Siddhartha came, is very
important because it indicates that he was an ordinary man just like us before he
achieved enlightenment. This second message is a very important message, as it
indicates that an ordinary human being can achieve enlightenment. The third
message tells us that it's not as though only the Buddha can achieve
enlightenment, and the rest of us have to somehow try our best and remain
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
10



Enlightenment is not like
a god realm, a permanent
and unchanging state
secondary. It's not like that. He taught the path through which everyone can
achieve enlightenment equally, just like him. The fourth message is very
important - it's not as though enlightenment is something like becoming a god,
or attaining a state that is unchanging, ultimate and permanent like some kind of
god realm, despite what we might think. The Buddha actually passed into the
parinirvana. This last message is very important. I think it is taught in the
Mahaparinirvana-sutra. This is also why he said that Buddhists, those who wish
to follow him in the future, must go to four places: Lumbini, where an ordinary
man was born; Bodh Gaya, where this ordinary person achieved enlightenment,
and so forth. We should do this to remind us that ordinary beings like us can do
it.
The seven vajra points set
out a path. The
Uttaratantra teaches that
if we follow this path, we
will attain the result,
because we have the
element
It's similar here, because when we talk about the seven vajra points, we're talking
about a path or a method. So, to return to the scriptural sources: kham, the
element, is also taught in the main body of the Sutra Requested by King
Dharanishvara. Because we have this element or potential - maybe the right word
here is 'potential' - if we follow the path, then we will attain the result. The last
three vajra points - enlightenment, qualities and Buddha activity - are also taught
in the same sutra. For instance, these include the ten powers, the four
fearlessnesses, the eighteen uncommon qualities of the Buddha, and so forth.
3
སངས་
ས་རྒྱས་ལས་ལྟོས་ཆོས་ལས་འཕགས་པའི་ཚོགས། །
ཚོགས་ལས་སྙིང་པོ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཁམས་ཐོབ་མཐར། ! 1
ཡེ་ཤེས་དེ་ཐོབ་བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་ཐོབ་སོགས། །
སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན་དོན་བྱེད་ཆོས་རྣམས་དང་ལྡན། །
From the Buddha, the Dharma; from the Dharma, the realized Sangha; from the
Sangha, the presence of the jñana-nature - the essence; when this jāana is ultimately
made manifest there is supreme enlightenment, powers and so on, endowed with every
ability to accomplish the good of each and everyone.
From the Buddha (stems the Dharma, from the Dharma the Assembly of noble ones,
from the Assembly the attainment of Buddha-nature, the element of primordial wisdom.
This wisdom finally attained is supreme enlightenment, the powers and so on, (thus
possessing the properties that fulfil the benefit of all sentient beings.
An explanation of the
order of the seven vajra
points
This stanza explains the order of the seven points. By understanding that
everything is equal, Buddha is enlightened. From the enlightened Buddha comes
the turning of the wheel of Dharma. By following this Dharma, there comes the
assembly of the Sangha. The assembly of the Sangha then works with the kham
or element. For example, they can do things like accumulating merit and
purifying defilements because of the element. A member of the Sangha is
someone who works with this kham, this element. And by working with the
element, then the Sangha achieves enlightenment. Although it might sound from
the word 'achieve that this enlightenment is something new, the practitioner has
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
11



not attained anything new. And as the practitioner achieves enlightenment, then
all the infinite qualities of enlightenment are achieved. And once you achieve
these infinite qualities of enlightenment, then you benefit sentient beings with
your activity.
Their order can also be
explained in other ways
The order of the seven vajra points can be taught in many other ways. For
example, the three gems - Buddha, Dharma and Sangha - can be understood as a
result. And the other four can be understood as a cause. All this will be
explained very thoroughly, so there's no need to worry. As you will see, this text
begins each subject with a summary, and then gives a slightly more detailed
explanation, and then a really extensive explanation. In many cases, it's almost
like going over the subject three times.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
12



The First Three Vajra Points: The Three Jewels
The First Vajra Point: Buddha
4
གང་ཞིག་ཐོག་མ་དབུས་མཐའ་མེད་ཞི་སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད་རང་རྣམ་སངས་རྒྱས།
སངས་རྒྱས་ནས་ནི་མ་རྟོགས་རྟོགས་ཕྱིར་འཇིགས་མེད་རྟག་པའི་ལམ་སྟོན་པ། །
མཁྱེན་བརྩེའི་རལ་གྲི་རྡོ་རྗེ་མཆོག་བསྣམས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་མྱུ་གུ་གཅོད་མཛད་ཅིང་
།
སྣ་ཚོགས་ལྟ་ཐིབས་ཀྱིས་བསྐོར་ཐེ་ཚོམ་རྩིག་པ་འཇིག་མཛད་དེ་ལ་འདུད། །
1
I bow down to the beginningless, to the centreless and infinite, to peace, to
Buddhahood, fully self-awakened and self-blossomed which, once purified and made
manifest, shows the fearless, permanent path which will bring realization to those with
no realization and which, wielding the supreme sword and vajra of knowledge and
compassionate love hews down the seedlings of sufferings and destroys the walls of
doubt surrounded by dense mistaken views.
Buddha is without beginning, middle or end. He is peace itself, fully self-awakened and
self-expanded in Buddhahood. Having reached this state, he shows the indestructible,
permanent path so that those who have no realization may realize. Wielding the
supreme sword and vajra of knowledge and compassionate love, he cuts the seedling of
suffering and destroys the wall of doubts along with its surrounding thicket of various
views. I bow down to this Buddha.
The state of Buddha has
no beginning, middle or
end, so Buddha is
uncompounded
Here we are talking about
the absolute Buddha, not
the historical or
manifestation Buddha
The state of Buddha is
one in which all concepts
and extremes are pacified
Now you will learn very extensively what Buddha, Dharma and Sangha mean.
First, we'll talk about the Buddha. The Buddha has no beginning, and therefore
no birth (kyewa). Buddha has no middle, and therefore there is no dwelling of the
Buddha. Buddha is beyond end, and therefore Buddha has no exhaustion or
cessation. So therefore, Buddha is uncompounded. One has to listen to these
words with a well-trained ear! The Buddha has pacified (shiwa). What has he
pacified? All extremes and conceptions. Wait, I made a mistake - when I say,
"Buddha has pacified", it's not a good way to say this. I have the feeling that
when we say, "Buddha has", it sounds like we are talking about something
historical. But we are talking about the real Buddha here - the absolute Buddha,
not the manifestation Buddha or historical Buddha. So I think we should say,
"Buddha is", in other words, the state of the Buddha is where all concepts and
extremes are pacified. Who understands this kind of state? Who found or
noticed such a state? No other beings found it, only the jñana or wisdom of self-
awareness (so so rang rigpey yeshey). So one can never attain or understand the
state of the Buddha with external conditions. Hearing this, we might think that
the Buddha is somehow unreachable or beyond us. Our limited mind
automatically asks how he functions. Now, although Buddha is enlightened, he
nevertheless has compassion towards those who haven't reached this kind of
realisation. So, in order to let sentient beings understand and not fear the
suffering of samsara, Buddha teaches the path that is without any fear of
Buddha can only be
understood through self-
awareness wisdom, so so
rang rigpey yeshey, but
the Buddha nevertheless
teaches sentient beings
out of his compassion
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
13



samsara. With wisdom that is like a sword, he cuts the shoot of suffering, and
with compassion that is like a vajra, he destroys the variety of views that are like
a wall. This is explained more extensively in the next stanza.
5
འདུས་མ་བྱས་ཤིང་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུག །
གཞན་གྱི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་རྟོགས་མིན་པ། །
མཁྱེན་དང་བརྩེ་དང་ནུས་པར་ལྡན།
!
དོན་གཉིས་ལྡན་པའི་སངས་ 1
རྒྱས་ཉིད།
Buddhahood is endowed with two-fold value. It is uncreated and spontaneous - not to
be realized through external causes. It is possessed of knowledge, compassionate love
and ability.
Being uncreated and spontaneously present, not a realization due to extraneous
conditions, wielding knowledge, compassionate love and ability, Buddhahood has the
qualities of the two benefits.
Compassion defined: it is
not mere sympathy. It is
the wish for others to
reach the state of wisdom
that is uncompounded
and spontaneously
accomplished, and which
cannot be realised by
external means
Buddha is uncompounded. Since there is no effort, Buddha is spontaneously
accomplished. Because Buddha can be understood only by the wisdom of self-
awareness, it cannot be comprehended through any other means or conditions.
Wisdom (khyenpa) or jñana is something that is uncompounded and
spontaneously accomplished, and that does not rely on other conditions.
Compassion is the wish for others to reach this state that is uncompounded and
spontaneously accomplished, and which cannot be realised by other conditions
or means. This is a very important definition of compassion, because
compassion is usually understood as some kind of sympathy, but Lord Maitreya
is saying that compassion is ultimately this. And it's not as though the wisdom
and compassion have no power. They have the power to dispel the suffering of
others. So Buddha has two meanings: for himself, Buddha has the meaning of
uncompounded, spontaneously accomplished and incomprehensible by others.
For others, he is equipped with wisdom, compassion and power. I will explain
this again, but first I would like to go through all of the section that describes
Buddha.
This wisdom is the
meaning of Buddha for
himself
For others, Buddha has
wisdom, compassion and
power (to dispel suffering)
6
ཐོག་མ་དབུས་མཐའ་མེད་པ་ཡི། །
རང་བཞིན་ཡིན་ཕྱིར་འདུས་མ་བྱས། །
ཞི་བ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ཅན་ཕྱིར། །
ལྷན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་ཅེས་བྱ་བར་བརྗོད། །
It is uncreated because its nature is without beginning, middle or end. It is said to be
spontaneity since it is peace, holder of dharmakaya.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
14



its nature is without beginning, middle or end; hence the state of a Buddha is
uncreated. Since it possesses the peaceful dharmakaya, it is described as being
"spontaneously present."
7
སོ་སོ་རང་གིས་རྟོགས་བྱའི་ཕྱིར། །
གཞན་གྱི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་རྟོགས་མིན་པ། །
དེ་ལྟར་རྣམ་གསུམ་རྟོགས་ཕྱིར་མཁྱེན།
ལམ་སྟོན་ཕྱིར་ན་ཐུགས་བརྩེ་བ། །
its realization is not due to any external cause since it has to be realized through one's
pure apperceptive cognition. It is knowledge since it is realization of these three. It is
great compassionate love because it shows the way.
Since it must be realized through self-awareness, it is not a realization due to extraneous
conditions. These three aspects being realized, there is knowledge. Since the path is
shown, there is compassionate love.
8
ནུས་པ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཡིས། །
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཉོན་མོངས་སྤོང་ཕྱིར་རོ།
དང་པོ་གསུམ་གྱིས་རང་དོན་ཏེ། །
ཕྱི་མ་གསུམ་གྱིས་
ས་གཞན་དོན་ཡིན། ། !
It is ability because it removes suffering and defilements by jñana and compassion.
Through these first three there is value for oneself and through the latter three there is
value for others.
There is ability since the mental poisons and suffering are relinquished by primordial
wisdom and compassion. Through the first three there is benefit for oneself. Through
the latter three there is benefit for others.
The state of Buddha is
free from extremes. This
is referred to as
dharmakaya
This is explained again, extensively, with reasoning. Since Buddha has no
beginning, middle and end, the nature of the Buddha is uncompounded. Since
Buddha is beyond all the extremes of body, speech and conception, the Buddha
is freedom (shiwa), free from all these extremes and conceptions, and that
freedom is what we call the dharmakaya (chökyi ku).
There are three qualities
of Buddha for himself and
three qualities of Buddha
concerning others
Because there are no extremes of body, speech and mind, we call it
spontaneously accomplished. There is no effort. And because this is something
that can only be understood by the wisdom of self-awareness, it cannot be
understood by others' words and training methods. Having these three qualities
is what we call 'wisdom', and in order to lead sentient beings onto the path to
achieve these three qualities, the Buddha has compassion. And the power of the
Buddha is none other than wisdom and compassion combined, because with
compassion and wisdom, Buddha can completely dispel the suffering of the
aggregates and their cause, the kleshas or negative emotions, from the root. The
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
15



first three qualities concern the Buddha himself - they are his own qualities, for
his own purpose. And the second set of three qualities concern others. That's
the end of the introduction to the Buddha.
It's easy to misunderstand
Buddha', because we
tend to think of a person
We also misunderstand it
as a level that we wish to
attain through practice
It's difficult to talk about Buddha because you cannot understand it through
mundane, ordinary methods such as words and language. That's why it is so
difficult. For example, when we say 'Buddha', our habitual mind immediately
thinks of a person. And there are many reasons for this. From an ordinary point
of view, we put statues of the Buddha on our shrine as objects of veneration,
homage, refuge and so on. And we also have the habitual pattern of thinking
that Buddha is a level, some kind of state that we wish to achieve or attain, which
is why we are practicing the Dharma. And even in the sutras there are words like
"the Buddha is the king of all sublime beings", or "a lion among men". All these
strengthen our habit of thinking that we are referring to a person when we talk
about the Buddha. Similarly, when we talk about compassion and wisdom, we
think we are talking about an agent - someone who does the knowing and
someone who has the compassion. This ordinary approach of understanding the
Buddha is something that we have to improve!
Likewise, we tend to think
of compassion and
wisdom in a dualistic way,
in terms of agent and
action
We also forget about the
'elimination when we talk
about 'result of
elimination
And then as we discussed yesterday, when we talk about the quality of
elimination', we keep on forgetting the 'elimination' part, and we get distracted
by the 'quality' part. For instance, even the word Buddha is loosely translated as
the 'awakened one'. When we say 'awakened one' (sang), we are talking about a
quality of elimination. To 'awaken' means to eliminate the deep sleep of
ignorance. It's really difficult to discuss the concept of Buddha!
Buddha is beyond time,
and therefore beyond
suffering. We cannot
even talk of 'achieving'
Buddhahood, as this is
related to time
The ultimate Buddha is
beyond all conceptions
Basically, as Maitreya has clearly pointed out, Buddha is none other than these
six qualities. Since it has no beginning, middle and end, we are talking about
something that is beyond time. If the entity or phenomenon of the Buddha were
stained by time, then it would be suffering. So Buddha is beyond time.
Therefore we can't even talk about 'achieving Buddhahood', as achieving
Buddhahood is a time-related matter. And another habit of our ordinary minds
is that every time we talk about the Buddha, we are talking about someone who
does this and that, for instance a person who begs in the streets of Magadha with
bare feet, holding a begging bowl. Someone who said, "when I was a
Bodhisattva", indicating that had a past life. Basically, someone who is limited by
symbols. The ultimate Buddha that Maitreya is talking about is beyond all that.
It's beyond conceptions. The moment that we think about something, it's a
production. It's a compounded phenomenon. Then it is dependent. What's the
problem with it being dependent? Then it will change. So in the morning you're
a Buddha, and maybe in the afternoon you're not a Buddha. We need to
understand that the ultimate Buddha is beyond all these extremes.
All conceptions are
compounded, and thus
dependent, and therefore
impermanent. Buddha is
beyond all such extremes
And again in our ordinary minds, we think Buddha is something that can be
achieved. For example, by acts of worship such as making offerings of flowers
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
16



Since Buddha is beyond
time, it cannot be
achieved through
conceptions or extremes
such as flower offerings
or visualisations
In the Diamond Sutra,
Buddha said "those who
see me as a form have a
wrong view
and drinking water, or by visualising the Buddha in front of you, or by visualising
yourself as the Buddha. But if the Buddha is beyond time and beyond
conceptions, then there is no way to achieve that kind of Buddha through
conceptions and extremes such as flower offerings. So these three qualities that
concern the Buddha himself are very important. Because even as we speak, we
speak in a very deluded language. For example, we say "himself", as if the
Buddha is limited by gender. In the Diamond Sutra, Buddha himself said "those
who see me as a form and those who hear me as a sound, they have a wrong
view". But even when we hear that quotation, we think 'this was spoken by the
Buddha, Gautama, who was born in India, who said that those who see me as a
form have wrong view'. We think this because he used the word 'me' (nga), as in
"those who see 'me' as a form have a wrong view", where this 'me' refers to the
son of Shuddodana and Mayadevi. The Diamond Sutra is another very important
Prajñaparamita sutra, and this text is the commentary to such sutras, and here it
explains what he meant when he said "those who see me as a form have a wrong
view".
Light is nothing other
than the elimination of
darkness, but we need to
understand the unity of
darkness and light
This is the result of elimination (dralwey dreybu) that we were talking about
yesterday. This is quite a good word, one that you should get used to. Because
when you eliminate darkness, what happens then? Then so-called light happens.
But it's nothing other than the elimination of darkness. We need to understand
the unity of darkness and light. Of course, we often get confused, because when
we talk about the quality of elimination, then the Mahayana sutras talk of 32
major marks and some of them are very tangible qualities, such as webbed hands
and special earlobes and all that, and then it becomes seemingly very substantial.
The 32 major marks are
seemingly substantial, but
they are important
symbolic teachings
For example, Vairocana
Buddha, the essence of all
form, is referred to as
'big', even though Buddha
transcends big and small
But these forms like the 32 major marks and 80 minor marks are very symbolic.
They are very important symbolic teachings. For instance, Vairocana Buddha is
supposedly the essence of form. He is the essence of every form, including all
the forms that we can perceive. Everything from a flower to the earlobe of the
Buddha is a form, a shape. And the essence of all these is Vairocana Buddha.
And who is Vairocana Buddha? Ultimately, someone who has these six qualities.
But again, when we talk to ordinary beings, there are teachings that describe the
appearance of Vairocana Buddha as "An ocean of snowy mountains" - it's a very
big Buddha, they will say. It begins with "big". Because somehow in the minds of
ordinary people, big is appreciated more than small. Of course, the Buddha
doesn't have any preference - there are no extremes of big and small. But when
we ordinary people talk about these things, somehow we think that the Buddha
should always be described in terms of best rather than worst. And when it
comes to big and small, maybe big is the better one!
Each of the 25 totus layers
above Vairocana's
begging bowl contains a
three thousand-fold
universe
You should read these kinds of texts thoroughly, and get all the way to the
bottom of them. Because when Vairocana is described, we hear that he's sitting
with his hands in the meditation mudra, and on the top of this mudra is his
begging bowl, and above this begging bowl there are 25 layers of lotus, each of
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
17



Each of his pores contains
a complete set of all these
universes, without the
pores becoming bigger or
the universes becoming
smatter
which contains a three thousand-fold universe. And counting downwards, the
thirteenth lotus has many universes, and one of them is called the 'fearless'
indivisible realm or universe. And within that universe we find Mount Meru and
many planets, and one small planet among these is called Jambudvipa, which is
where we are now! So all these descriptions are telling us that he is a very big
man! So we continue, and read more. And then it says that in each pore, there's
a complete set of what we have just spoken about. Until now, we were thinking
that he's a big man. But now when it says that there's a whole set of all the
universes in each pore, we are starting to question the concept of a big man.
And next it says that these pores have not become bigger to accommodate the
universe, and nor has the universe become smaller. They're all the same size.
So now we're back to non-duality, and we're back to the Buddha being
uncompounded and spontaneously accomplished. We're back to something that
cannot be comprehended with all our ordinary means.
Thus our idea of 'big' is
deconstructed, and we
return to non-duality
We also misunderstand
Buddha because we talk
about it from an
emotional point of view,
seeing it as something
better than our current
experience
It's very difficult to conceive of these things, because most of the time when we
talk about the Buddha, we're always talking about him from an emotional point
of view. We imagine a place where things are seven times better than what we
have now, where there are many gigabytes and a very fast broadband connection!
But as long as we think in terms of gigabytes and broadband and fast and
automatic, then conception is already there. And as long as there is conception,
then there are compounded phenomena, and then it's not independent. Then
you are suffering again. So you can see that this is difficult Really identifying
the Buddha is difficult, and Lord Maitreya has done a really good job!
So if Buddha is completely
inexpressible and beyond
conception, how can any
communication take
place?
Now all of this makes us think that whoever this Buddha is, he is completely
unreachable and beyond all of us. All we have is our mind, our eyes, our nose,
and our consciousness. This Buddha is something beyond mind and beyond
comprehension through any other means, so there is no kind of bridge from him
to us, if he is indeed a "him"! So if he's really beyond us, inexpressible and
beyond our conception, how do we start? How can communication take place?
This is why the qualities
of the Buddha are divided
into two sets - those
concerning himself, and
those concerning others -
with kham, the element,
as the bridge between
them
This is why the six qualities of the Buddha are divided into two sets. The first
three are referred to as qualities concerning himself, and the second set of three
are the qualities concerning others (sometimes we refer to 'eight qualities', by
adding qualities concerning himself' and 'qualities concerning others' to the
other six qualities). So now we can see that there's a bridge emerging. Between
these six - between the first three qualities and the second set of three qualities
- there is already a bridge. We don't need anything else, as we have kham, the
element. That's why kham, the fourth of the seven vajra points, is so important.
It's really misleading for us to say, "we have this element", but what can we do?
It's the only way for us to talk about it. Anyway, let's say that we have this
nature, this family, this element. It's because of this - and here we are talking
academically - that we can experience the result of elimination,
To experience the result,
we need only to remove
the temporary garbage
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
18



This is none other than
receiving the Buddha's
wisdom, compassion,
power and blessings
All we need to do is to eliminate the temporary garbage - that's all we need to
do. And what is this so-called elimination of the temporary garbage? It's none
other than receiving the wisdom, compassion and power of the Buddha. This is
why prayer works, why blessing works - why everything works. This is why all
the methods of thinking will work to help you reach somewhere where there is no
thinking, somewhere beyond thinking.
We can't say Buddha is
everywhere, nor that
Buddha is nowhere. We
cannot say anything!
I hope we have managed to give some vague introduction to the Buddha. It
shouldn't be bound by time, space or gender. You cannot say, like all these
spaced-out hippies, that Buddha is everywhere - but nor can you say, like those
nerdy intellectual nihilists, that it's nowhere. You cannot say anything! If you
really want to say something, you can recite these few stanzas. Oh, by the way,
the first stanza introducing the Buddha comes in the form of homage, a
prostration, but it does not mean that this is the homage that usually comes at
the beginning of a text. Now, let's discuss the Dharma.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
First Vajra Point - Buddha
19



The Second Vajra Point; Dharma
9
གང་ཞིག་མེད་མིན་ཡོད་མིན་ཡོད་མེད་མ་ཡིན་ཡོད་མེད་ལས་གཞན་དུའང་། །
བརྟག་པར་མི་ནུས་ངེས་ཚིག་དང་བྲལ་སོ་སོ་རང་གིས་རིག་ཞི་བ། །
དྲི་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས་འོད་ཟེར་སྣང་ལྡན་དམིགས་པ་ཀུན་ལ་ཆགས་པ་དང་། །
སྡང་དང་རབ་རིབ་རྣམ་པར་འཇོམས་མཛད་དམ་ཆོས་ཉི་མ་དེ་ལ་འདུད། །
I bow down to the sun of Dharma, which is neither existence nor non-existence, nor
existence with non-existence, nor other than existence and non-existence: the
unexaminable, beyond all verbal definition, the self-cognisant-peace, the stainless,
brilliant with the light of jñana, which completely destroys craving for, aversion to or
dullness towards mental objects.
The Dharma is neither non-existent not existent. It is not both existent and non-existent,
nor is it other than existent and non-existent. It is inaccessible to such investigation and
cannot be defined. It is self-aware and peace. The Dharma is without defilement.
Holding the brilliant light rays of primordial wisdom, it fully defeats attachment,
aversion and dull indifference with regard to all objects of perception. I bow down to
this sun of the sacred Dharma.
A summary of the second
vajra point, Dharma, in
the form of praise
The Dharma is something that can be understood by self-awareness wisdom (so
so rang rigpey yeshey). Therefore it is not inexistent, and thus it is free from
nihilism. At the same time, it does not have a truly existing nature, so Dharma is
free from the extreme of eternalism. Dharma is not both existent and non-
existent, so Dharma is not neither. Dharma is beyond words and language,
beyond analogy or methods, although it can be understood with self-awareness.
Dharma is free from the root of samsara, which is emotion, and from improper
thoughts. Therefore Dharma, the path, is stainless. Because Dharma is free from
clinging to phenomena, Dharma is luminous. Dharma is beyond object, and
therefore Dharma is free from desire towards beautiful objects. Dharma is free
from aggression that arises towards undesirable objects. Dharma destroys the
darkness of ignorance. To this Dharma, which is like a sun, I prostrate. As
before, this will be explained very extensively, twice.
བསམ་མེད་གཉིས་མེད་རྟོག་མེད་པ། །
དག་གསལ་གཉེན་པོའི་ཕྱོགས་ཉིད་ཀྱིས། །
གང་ཞིག་གང་གིས་ཆགས་བྲལ་བ། །
བདེན་གཉིས་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན་དེ་ཆོས། །
The Dharma is that imbued with the very characteristics of the two truths; that which is,
and that which causes, freedon from bondage. Inconceivable, not two and concept-
free, purity, clarity and the remedy.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Second Vajra Point: Dharma
20



inconceivable, free from the two (veils) and from thought, being pure, clear and playing
the part of an antidote, it is free from attachment and frees from attachment. This is the
Dharma with its features of the two truths.
ཆགས་བྲལ་ཉིད་ནི་འགོག་པ་དང་། ། !
ལམ་གྱི་བདེན་པ་དག་གིས་བསྡུས།
གོ་རིམས་ཇི་བཞིན་དེ་དག་ཀྱང་། །
ཡོན་ཏན་གསུམ་གསུམ་གྱིས་རིག་བྱ། 1
"Freedom from bondage" covers the truths of cessation and the path and these each
have qualities three, for each, respectively.
Freedom from attachments as fruit and meansconsists of the truths of cessation and
path. Accordingly these should also be known by means of three qualities each.
Like Buddha, Dharma is
described in two sets of
qualities. In this case:
(1) the truth of cessation,
(2) the truth of the path to
Cessation
Dharma cannot be conceived of or contemplated. Dharma is free from dualism
such as karma and emotion. Dharma is free from confused mind. Dharma is
pure from emotions. Dharma is the illuminating wisdom itself. Dharma is the
antidote to the three poisons. Like Buddha, Dharma has six different qualities.
The three first qualities - which are that Dharma is beyond contemplation, non-
dual, and inconceivable - are what we call the truth of the cessation of suffering
(gokpey denpa). The second set of three qualities are the path to the cessation of
suffering (lamgyi denpa). These two truths - the truth of cessation and the truth
of path to cessation - are the characteristics that define Dharma. And the
absence of attachment and clinging is the truth of cessation, and also the path to
the cessation. And the order of the definition of the Dharma comes in two sets
of three qualities. The first three are the definition for the truth of cessation, and
the later three are the definition of the path to cessation. Again, this is explained
extensively.
12
བརྟག་མིན་ཕྱིར་དང་བརྗོད་མིན་ཕྱིར། །
འཕགས་པས་མཁྱེན་ཕྱིར་བསམ་མེད་ཉིད། །
ནི་ཉིར་གཉིས་མེད་རྟོག་མེད་དེ། །
དག་སོགས་གསུམ་ནི་ཉི་བཞིན་ནོ། ?
Inconceivability (since it defies examination by thought, expression by speech and it is
the knowledge of the realized), absence of two and to be concept-free (peace), purity
and so on, these three being like the sun.
Not being an object of conceptual investigation, being inexpressible, and only to be
known by noble ones, the Dharma is inconceivable. Since it is peace, it is free from the
two (veils and free from thought. In its three aspects of purity and so on it is similar to
the sun.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche -- Uttaratantra - 2003
Second Vajra Point: Dharma
21



Dharma cannot be uttered
with language or
conceived of with ordinary
mind, but it dispels the
kleshas and karma, it is
stainless and luminous
like the sun
The Dharma cannot be imputed with the four kinds of imputation, namely
existence, non-existence, both and neither. It cannot be uttered with sound,
words or language. Only an Arya, a sublime being, can understand the Dharma.
Therefore, it is something that cannot be conceived of by ordinary mind. But it
dispels the kleshas and karma, and there are no improper thoughts. It is
stainless and luminous, and therefore the Dharma is like the sun. So, let's
discuss this a little more.
We should not
misunderstand Dharma as
some kind of method or
technique
To our ordinary minds, 'Dharma' usually refers to a path. It refers to some kind
of method or technique. But it's a very big mistake to understand the Dharma as
a technique. Again, we have to invoke this concept of the result of elimination.
Yesterday we talked about peeling layers of skin. However, the skin is not the
Dharma, and therefore the process of peeling the skin is also not Dharma. So
what is Dharma? Dharma is the fact that the skin is not the fruit or the seed.
The Dharma is that there is no seed - that fact is the Dharma. The ordinary mind
thinks that peeling the skin reveals the fruit, but that's just ordinary thinking.
The real Dharma is beyond words, beyond conceptions, and all that we have just
discussed.
Dharma is neither the
skin nor the peeling of
the skin. It is the fact that
there is no seed
How does Dharma
benefit? Through the
second set of qualities, as
an antidote to the idea of
a fruit inside
So how does the Dharma benefit us? For this, we come to the second set of three
qualities. Dharma is an antidote. For instance, when you are peeling layers of
skin and getting closer to the inner skins, the fact that there is ultimately no fruit
at the centre works as an antidote to the notion that there must be a fruit inside.
Nyoshul Khen Rinpoche's
example of the thin iron
meat hooks onto which
things get stuck
Dharma should never be
like this. It should never
hook or entangle you
For example, there is something quite interesting that you should know when
you do prostrations or take refuge in the Buddha. When we say Buddha, we say
kangnyi namkyi chok, which literally means 'supreme among bipeds', the supreme
among men. That's how we refer to the Buddha when we take refuge. But when
we take refuge in the Dharma, it is defined as something that is not clinging to
anything. This is very important. Nyoshul Khen Rinpoche has a good example
here. He said that the path, the Dharma should never be like a very thin iron
hook. For example, imagine that you have many such hooks hanging, and then
without really aiming you throw some meat at these hooks - maybe it would be
better to think of throwing a sweater! The hooks hold the sweater - basically it
gets stuck there. Nyoshul Khen Rinpoche said that Dharma should never be like
that. No concept of Dharma should hold and entangle you so that you have to
undo it. He continued with his example - the fact that the iron is so thin makes
it even harder to take it out, because if it were one big and solid hook, it would
be easy to remove. But because there are many small hooks, all very thin, the
meat or whatever gets hooked. And this example applies to all the things we
were talking about earlier, because we usually think that Dharma is a concept, an
idea. But an idea refers to something that's already hooked, something that's
already stuck - and that means suffering again. Dharma is not an idea, It's
chaktok dralwa. It's free from being attached (chakpa), and free from being
blocked or obstructed (togpa)
Dharma is beyond ideas
and concepts, chaktok.
These are all hooked or
stuck, and lead to
suffering
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Second Vajra Point: Dharma
22



For example, we get
hooked on the concept of
'flower', so we don't think
of it as a bowl of soup
A good idea is once which
is strongly stuck. This is
how all our ideas lead to
conflict and suffering
For instance, a flower is a concept. We are hooked, attached (chak). And our
idea of flower has arrived at a dead end - 'flower'. It's impossible for us to think
of this flower as a bowl of soup - do you understand? This is how all our ideas
lead to conflicts, and also where there are no conflicts! Ideas arise, and then we
get stuck there. 'Idea' means stuck, getting stuck -- that's how ideas should be
formed, isn't it? Saying that something is a good idea means that it's really
sticky, that it's strongly stuck. If it doesn't stick well, then it's a shaky or
irrational idea, something that isn't so good. Our mind is a bit like honey, but
honey that isn't in its jar! It is sticky - it sticks to other things and other things
get stuck on it. Do you understand? But the Dharma that Maitreya is describing
here is totally different. It's not an idea. All the ideas need to be peeled away!
Remember the result of elimination (dralwey dreybu), if you always go back to
this draldrey, it really helps. Every idea needs to be eliminated. If you are stuck
with an idea, then you are thinking that that the skin a fruit, and that is a
misunderstanding.
All ideas need to be
peeled away. If you get
stuck with an idea, even
of Dharma, you are
thinking that the skin is
the fruit
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Second Vajra Point: Dharma
23



The Third Vajra Point: Sangha
13
སེམས་དེ་རང་བཞིན་འོད་གསལ་བས་ན་ཉོན་མོངས་ངོ་བོ་མེད་གཟིགས་པས། །
གང་དག་འགྲོ་ཀུན་བདག་མེད་མཐའ་ཞི་ཡང་དག་རྟོགས་ནས་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ། །
རྫོགས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས་རྗེས་ཞུགས་གཟིགས་པ་སྒྲིབ་པ་མེད་པའི་བློ་མངའ་བ། །
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམ་དག་མཐའ་ཡས་ཡུལ་ཅན་ཡེ་ཤེས་གཟིགས་མངའ་དེ་ལ་འདུད། །
i bow down to those whose mind is no longer obscured, who possess jnana-
perception-awareness of total purily present in limitless beings. As the nature of mind is
clarity, they see defilements to be without essence and hence truly realize the ultimate
no-self, the peace within all beings. Thus they know the all-pervasive presence of
perfect Buddhahood in each and every one of them.
This mind being by nature clear light, they have seen the poisons to be essenceless and
therefore truly realize (the nature of every being as peace, the ultimate non-existence of
a self. They perceive that the Perfect Buddha pervades them all. They possess the
understanding that is free from veits. Thus seeing that beings are utterly pure and that
{this purity pervades their limitless number, they are endowed with the vision of
primordial wisdom. I bow down to this (Sangha).
Bodhisattvas who have
destroyed samsara have
naturally luminous minds.
They understand things
as they are and as many
as they are
So now we come to Sangha. For Bodhisattvas who have reached the state of
'non-returner', which means those who have destroyed samsara, their minds are
naturally luminous. This luminosity, their luminous wisdom, arises because they
have seen that emotions such as desire, aggression and so on have never existed
throughout beginningless time. These Bodhisattvas who have realised
selflessness or the state beyond extremes have understood things as they are.
At the same time, they have realised that the Buddha dharmakaya exists within
alt sentient beings, and so they understand things as many as they are. To these
Bodhisattvas I prostrate. As usual, this is explained further.
ཇི་ལྟ་ཇི་སྙེད་ནང་གི་ནི། ། i
ཡེ་ཤེས་གཟིགས་པ་དག་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
བློ་ལྡན་ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པའི་ཚོགས། །
བླ་མེད་ཡོན་ཏན་དང་ལྡན་ཉིད།
The Sangha of the wise, who never regress, possess unsurpassable qualities because
they have pure perception: how-it-isness, manyness and the inner jnana.
The assembly of those who have understanding and thus do not fall back has
unsurpassable qualities, since their vision of inner primordial wisdom, which knows
correctly and knows completely, is pure.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Third Vajra Point: Sangha
24



འགྲོ་བ་ཞི་བའི་ཆོས་ཉིད་དུ། །
རྟོགས་ཕྱིར་ཇི་ལྟ་ཉིད་དེ་ཡང་
། །
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་ནི་ཡོངས་དག་ཕྱིར། །
ཉོན་མོངས་གདོད་ནས་ཅད་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
The deeply-realized have how-it-isness because they have understood the peaceful
nature of all beings, their absolute purity by nature, and that all defilements have been
extinct from the very beginning.
Realizing beings in their state of peace (the noble ones; know correctly, for (the mind) is
by nature utterly pure and the poisons were always exhausted.
ཤེས་བྱ་མཐར་ཐུག་རྟོགས་པའི་བློས། །
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཆོས་ཉིད་ནི། །
སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་
བ་ཡོད་པར།
མཐོང་ཕྱིར་ཇི་སྙེད་ཡོད་པ་ཉིད། །
They have manyness through intelligence which understands the ultimate object of
knowledge; it perceives that all beings have the nature of omniscience.
Their understanding, which realizes the knowable as well as {its) ultimate condition,
sees that the state of omniscience is within all beings. Thus the (noble ones) know
completely.
དེ་ལྟར་རྟོགས་པ་གང་ཡིན་དེ། །
སོ་སོ་རང་ཤེས་མཐོང་བ་ཉིད། །
དྲི་མེད་དབྱིངས་ལ་ཆགས་མེད་དང་
། །
ཐོགས་མེད་ཕྱིར་དེ་དག་པ་ཡིན། །
Such understanding is that which is seen by self-cognisant jñana. This is completely
pure because the stainless space is free from hindrance and from desire.
Such realization is the vision of wisdom that is self-aware. This wisdom is pure, since it
sees the undefiled expanse, free from attachment and obstruction.
】 3
ཡེ་ཤེས་གཟིགས་པ་དག་པས་ན། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཡེ་ཤེས་བླ་མེད་ཕྱིར། །
འཕགས་པ་ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་པ་ནི། །
ལུས་ཅན་ཀུན་གྱི་སྐྱབས་ཡིན་ནོ། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Third Vajra Point: Sangha
25



The "never regressing deeply-realized" are for all beings a refuge because of
Linsurpassable Buddhajñana and because of their completely pure perception through
iñana.
Their vision of} primordial wisdom is pure and (nearsi unsurpassable Buddha wisdom.
The noble ones who do not fall back are therefore a refuge for all beings.
Why Bodhisattvas are
more supreme than
Shravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas
With self-awareness, Bodhisattvas understand things as they are and how they
appear. Therefore they are free from clinging and obstructions. Therefore those
who possess such a great mind (löden), do not return to samsara. So they are far
more supreme than all the Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas. Bodhisattvas have
realised that sentient beings have always been never separated from the
extremeless chönyi, the reality of all phenomena. Therefore they understand how
sentient beings are. And Bodhisattvas purify temporary defilements, but not in
the sense that the defilements existed at the start and were then subsequently
eliminated. Because in the ultimate truth, sentient beings have never been
stained by temporary defilements. Therefore Bodhisattvas know that all sentient
beings, without any difference, have this tathagatagarbha. And this
understanding comes not through some external means, but because of the
Bodhisattvas' own self-awareness. The space of the dharmadhatu or absolute
dimension (ying) is always stainless. And that is the stainless quality of the
Sangha that we're talking about here. The Sangha is also free from the
obscurations to omniscience, and so the Sangha has not only realised ordinary
emptiness, but also complete emptiness. Because the Sangha is free from
clinging and obstruction, the Sangha is also the object of refuge.
The Sangha is free from
clinging and obstruction,
so it is an object of refuge
Day 3
Introduction
The Uttaratantra is taught
as a later subject, so the
concept of kham or
Buddha-nature is not
misunderstood
The Uttaratantra appears
simple at first, but the
more you study, the more
difficult it becomes
I mentioned that the Uttaratantra-Shastra is generally taught as a later subject in
Buddhist philosophical schools. I think there's quite a good reason for that. If it
were taught right at the beginning, let's say as an introduction to Buddhism, then
I guess there is a danger that a practitioner could misunderstand the concept of
kham, the Buddha-nature. Also, and this is just my observation, the stanzas of
the gyü lama, the Uttaratantra text, are quite easy to understand at a glance,
especially if you haven't studied Madhyamika before. The subjects are not like
Mulamadhyamikakarika or Madhyamakavatara where there are a lot of arguments
and fine points of analysis. At a glance, the Uttaratantra is basically about the
Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, and the qualities of the Buddha and so on. But this is
a very special text: the more you study it, the more difficult it becomes! And
especially if you've studied Madhyamika before, then this is so difficult! Because
you will have heard teachings that say there is not a single phenomenon that is
not interdependent, and therefore there is not a single phenomenon that is not
emptiness. You will have heard stuff like that. And now, suddenly we are
introduced to a different way of describing things - we hear that there is
Madhyamika teaches that
all phenomena are
emptiness
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Third Vajra Point: Sangha
26



But here we are told there
is something clean, self,
and uncompounded -
seemingly the opposite of
what Madhyamika teaches
something that is uncompounded, there is something that is clean, there is self -
all these things that are seemingly almost the complete opposite of what we hear
from the Madhyamika. And there's a good reason for this.
Many philosophies have
some kind of nihilist
deconstruction of
phenomena
You see, the Buddhist view of emptiness, the Buddhist philosophy of emptiness is
not something that you read just to stimulate your mind and then maybe leave
the book on a shelf, or maybe at times gather together with some nerdy people
to talk about philosophy! It's not for that. You know, some kind of nihilist
deconstruction of phenomena can be found in many philosophies, such as
existentialism and so on. They arrive at a sort of partial emptiness, where there's
no previous life, no next life, no god, no karma, no cause and condition. I think
there are people who have that kind of habit and view. But in the Madhyamika,
every aspect of these extremes is thoroughly analysed and deconstructed. For
example, in the Mulamadhyamikakarika, everything is analysed -- from coming
and going, all the way up to the tathagata, the Buddha. And Nagarjuna
concludes that everything is emptiness. But as I said before, emptiness is not
just a concept for us to learn about, discuss and then forget. We need it
throughout the path. The effort made by Madhyamika masters like Nagarjuna
and the purpose of the Buddhist teachings on the Madhyamika is not merely to
provoke an academic discussion that is then left behind, but to liberate sentient
beings.
Nagarjuna analyses, and
finds that everything is
emptiness, right up to the
Buddha. But his aim is
not merely to provoke
discussion. It is to set out
a path
As soon as we talk of
liberation, we must talk of
a path, otherwise there is
no point in writing
If we talk of path, we
must talk of defilements.
We must talk of someone
who hasn't yet reached
the finishing line
And as soon as we talk about liberation, we have to talk about a path. Otherwise
it will become like the views of some contemporary philosophers - no path, no
guru, and all of that. They write hundreds of books about it, but it's all a self-
contradiction! Why write? Why say anything? I'm trying to provoke any
Krishnamurti followers who might be here! To write a book saying that there is
no path is a self-contradiction. You have to have a path, and when you talk
about a path, you have to talk about a finishing line, otherwise what kind of
circular path are you on? It's a deception. So we have to talk about defilements,
because when we talk about a path, we are talking about someone who hasn't yet
reached the finishing line. And then we have to talk about the reason why we're
not there, so obviously we're talking about defilements. And, most importantly,
we have to talk about the person who is on the path. We haven't forgotten about
emptiness. All of it is still intact in our head. We're not denying Nagarjuna and
all that at all. We are very much embracing Nagarjuna's view, but we
nevertheless have to talk about someone on the path. So we ask, who is this
someone? And this is where we have to talk about kham, the element or nature,
or rig, the race or family that we've been talking about.
We must also talk of the
person on the path, and
this is where we talk of
kham or Buddha-nature
For a path, we also need a
reference point or model
of 'success', someone
who is better than we are
When you are on the path, a big part of being on the path is having a reference
point or model of what you want to become. You have to talk about some kind
of model of how you want to look, how you want to think, and how you want to
speak, because you're talking about the path. This model usually has to be
someone better than you, otherwise why would you consider them a model? All
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Third Vajra Point: Sangha
27



This seems to contradict
emptiness, where there is
no better or worse, just
the great equanimity
Maitreya's model is the
Three Jewels, but this
doesn't contradict
Nagarjuna at all
this might seem to be a contradiction with emptiness, because if everything is
emptiness, there is no such thing as someone being better or worse than you.
Everything is the great equanimity or equality (nyampar chenpo). So when he
talks about a model, Maitreya very skilfully presents three models: the Three
Jewels. But as you have noticed in the stanzas we went through earlier, this
doesn't contradict what Nagarjuna said about emptiness: no end, no beginning,
and no middle (togma tama umeypa). What Maitreya is saying here when he talks
about the Three Jewels is just what Nagarjuna said. Really, all the stanzas, every
word is so important.
When we talk of a path,
we also talk of progress
(i.e. qualities), and the
benefit upon finishing the
path (i.e. activity)
Of course, when we talk about path, we have to talk about progress. That's when
we talk about the qualities (yönten). And then, what will happen when you finish
the path? What is the benefit? That's the Buddha activity (trinley). As I was
telling you, during the path you need some kind of finishing line, but this
finishing line is not something external - the stanzas say this very clearly.
We also talk of devotion,
T.e. trust or confidence.
For example, we spend
money to have our
windows cleaned because
we trust that the dirt is
washable
And yet at the same time we talk about an object of supplication. When we talk
about object of supplication, we're talking about devotion. Devotion is basically
trust. And trust is confidence. I think we should introduce the example of the
window. It's not the best example, but it might work. The very reason why we
spend so much money buying all kinds of equipment to wash our windows is
because there is trust. There is devotion. We trust that the dirt is washable, that
the dirt is temporary, and the clean window is what we call the result of
elimination (dralwey dreybu). Now, the word 'result' (dreybu) is path language.
Removing the dirt is our aim during the path, hence the result is called the result
of elimination. This word 'result of elimination' seems to imply that you need to
eliminate something, but actually it was never there in the first place! In reality,
the window was never dirty. When you buy a pane of glass to make a window,
you never buy it with the dirt included! The dirt isn't in the bill, you understand.
It's not "the glass and this amount of dirt will cost this much"!
The clean window is
dralwey dreybu, the
fresult of elimination', but
this is path language. In
reality the window has
never been dirty, and
there's nothing to
eliminate
We crave the glass that
was originally clean, and
hence we work to clean
the dirt. This is the path
The Sakyapas have a very good way of describing this. You know that when you
buy the glass it's not dirty, so when you see dirt on the glass, your aim is to
clean it (shelwa). You crave the original glass that you bought, and you work to
attain that. For example you buy soap and wash the glass, and this gradually
brings you towards your goal. That's what's happening during the path. It's
slightly difficult to understand these things.
You know the glass didn't
come with any dirt, so you
wash the dirt with this
confidence. The path is a
great delusion!
When we talk about the result of elimination', that's path language. In reality,
the glass never came with dirt as part of it, and it's with that base of confidence
that you wash the window. You know that it's washable, that the glass is not
dirt. That's how the path works. The path is a great delusion - this will be
taught right afterwards - the path is deceptive. We call this the Lion's Roar
(sengey naro) of the Buddha Dharma. Which path apart from the Mahayana can
say, "Our path is deceptive"?
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Third Vajra Point: Sangha
28



Because the original giass
had no dirt, there is no
concept of clean
I'm sorry, but we have to dwell on this glass a little longer! The original glass
that you bought is not dirty. It didn't come with the dirt. And because there was
no dirt, therefore there is no concept of clean. We call this no beginning, middle
or end (togma tama umeypa), and when we talk about 'middle, beginning, and
end', then already we are talking about the path. The dirt is the beginning
(togma), the washing is the middle, and then the end is when the dirt has gone -
do you understand?
So there is no beginning,
middle or end. 'Cleaning'
and 'clean' are path
fanguage
The Three Refuges
Similarly, in Vajrayana,
taking refuge in the Three
Jewels you have visualised
in front of you is 'relative
taking refuge'. The
indispensable part is
when the refuge dissolves
and remains inseparably
within you
This is so important to understand, even for instance in the Vajrayana, when we
take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and visualise the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha in the space before us. All of that is called 'relative taking
refuge' (kundzop chi chabdro). The most indispensable thing when taking refuge
is that at the end the refuge objects dissolve into you, and then you remain
inseparable from the refuge objects within you. This comes back to all that we
talked about yesterday. Although this is not the time for Vajrayana, I think that it
might work as an example. This inseparability of yourself and the object of
refuge, such as the guru, is a very interesting concept. In many people's head,
this inseparability is something like having been divorced for a long time, so to
speak, before practicing Guru Yoga. Or maybe we had never even met. And only
after practicing Guru Yoga do we somehow get engaged and then mixed. And
then from then on we pray and long for inseparability. We have that kind of
concept, but according to the Uttaratantra, that's absolutely wrong! If you think
that you can only become inseparable from the guru once the guru has dissolved
into you, then you are completely denying the fourth vajra point - the kham, the
element. It's a bit like this. It's not as though you become inseparable only after
practicing Guru Yoga. It's more like you have always been inseparable. In fact,
there aren't even two objects that could be inseparable.
If you only think you are
inseparable from the guru
after the dissolution, you
are denying kham
It's more like you have
always been inseparable.
In fact there aren't even
two things that could be
inseparable
We aim for the model, the
finishing line, and hence
we take refuge
But it is not like taking
refuge in suntan lotion to
get a tan. Instead we
have to know we have
always been tanned!
So as I was saying, we long for the clean window. That's our aim. It's our
finishing line, our model, what we want. And this is also why we use words like
take refuge'. It's not like taking refuge in suntan lotion when you don't want to
get burned. Instead, you have to know that you have always been tanned. If you
were not originally tanned, then the suntan lotion would have to be used again
and again. You would have to attain enlightenment again and again, as if you
had to renew your enlightenment membership! So this is a path, and during the
path, we take refuge in the Three Jewels. We have the concept of refuge and we
have the concept that the Three Jewels are the object of refuge.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Third Vajra Point: Sangha
29



19
སྟོན་པ་བསྟན་པ་བསླབ་དོན་གྱིས། །
ཐེག་པ་གསུམ་དང་བྱེད་གསུམ་ལ། །
མོས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་དབང་བྱས་ནས། །
སྐྱབས་གསུམ་རྣམ་པར་བཞག་པ་ཡིན།
1
Through the aspects of the teacher, the teaching and the disciples, the refuge is
presented as threefold: in relation to the three vehicles and to those whose aspirations
are to the three styles of action.
There being the teacher, his teaching and his disciple leads to respective aspirations
towards three vehicles and to three different activities (of veneration. Viewing this, the
refuge is shown as threefold.
We "refer to the Three
jewels as the object of
refuge. We label them for
the sake of the path
We refer to the Three Jewels as the object of refuge. It's so beautiful to say that
we "refer" to them this way, meaning that it's not as though they are this. We
label or categorise them as objects of refuge for the sake of the path - Buddha as
the teacher, Dharma as his teachings such as interdependent reality, and Sangha
as those who practice this Dharma. And we also categorise the vehicles into
three. The vehicle that aims for Buddhahood is the Mahayana. The vehicle that
aims to attain the realisation of the Dharma is the Pratyekabuddha path, and the
vehicle that seeks freedom from samsara is the Shravakayana.
We also categorise the
vehicles into three
Different beings favour
different refuge objects
while on the path
The only ultimate object
of refuge is the Buddha
Different beings at different times favour different objects among these three,
and therefore, they are referred to as three objects of refuge. But this is only for
the sake of the path, as they will not remain as objects of fuge when you
achieve enlightenment. This will be explained further. The gyü lama is so nice -
everything is explained again and again and again! Now according to Maitreya,
among these three, the only ultimate object of refuge is the Buddha. Dharma is
not really an ultimate object of refuge, as we will see when we now look at the
two kinds of Dharma: scripture and realisation.
Dharma has two aspects.
scripture and realisation
20
ཀྲུང་ཕྱིར་བསླུ་བའི་ཆོས་ཅན་ཕྱིར། །
མེད་ཕྱིར་འཇིགས་དང་བཅས་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
ཆོས་རྣམས་གཉིས་དང་འཕགས་པའི་ཚོགས། །
གཏན་གྱི་སྐྱབས་མཆོག་མ་ཡིན་ནོ། །
Neither both aspects of Dharma nor the deeply-realized Sangha constitute a supreme
refuge that will last forever - because they are to be abandoned, one is an inconstant
and one nothing whatsoever and because they have fear.
{The Dharma) will be abandoned and is of an unsteady nature. It is not the ultimate
quality and {the Sangha) is still with fear. Thus the two aspects of Dharma and the
Assembly of noble ones do not represent the supreme refuge, which is constant and
stable
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Third Vajra Point: Sangha
30



You abandon the skins of
the scriptural Dharma as
you gradually peel them
Even realisation Dharma
is compounded, the result
of a process. Realisation
changes as skins are
peeled
The scriptural Dharma is something that you abandon automatically when you
reach the other shore. Even as you are getting closer to the other shore, you
abandon the skins gradually as you peel them - you remember? And even the
realisation Dharma, which is when a practitioner realises something, is a
production. It is dujey, compounded, because it is the result of a process. All
our realisations will change, again like peeling the skins. We realise another,
more inner skin, thinking "this is it", and then that also gets peeled away. Every
realisation is a step, and this is why even the realisation Dharma is deceptive.
Even the realisation of
Shravakas is only an
understanding of partial
emptiness, so it is not the
ultimate object of refuge
Even the final realisation of the Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas - we are not
referring here to the final realisation of the Buddha - is actually only an
understanding of partial emptiness. It is only the absence of suffering and
emotion. Therefore it is not the ultimate object of refuge. And even Arhats -
even Pratyekabuddhas I think, but definitely Arhats - although they have reached
their final stage, their final enlightenment, they nevertheless still have fear
towards aggregates and karma. And Bodhisattvas, those who are on the
Mahayana path, are still on the path right until the last moment of the tenth
bhumi, so they still have some kind of fear. Therefore they are also not ultimate
objects of refuge. So the only ultimate object of refuge is the Buddha.
Even Bodhisattvas have
some fear right to the end
of the tenth bhumi, so
only the Buddha is the
ultimate object of refuge
21
དམ་པའི་དོན་དུ་འགྲོ་བ་ཡི། །
སྐྱབས་ནི་སངས་རྒྱས་ཉག་གཅིག་ཡིན། །
ཐུབ་པ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ཅན་ཕྱིར། །
ཚོགས་ཀྱང་དེ་ཡི་མཐར་ཐུག་ཕྱིར། 1
Ultimately, only the Buddha constitutes a refuge for beings because that great victor is
the embodiment of Dharma which is the ultimate attainment of the Sangha.
in a true sense only the Buddha is beings' refuge, since the Great Sage embodies the
dharmakaya, and the Assembly also reaches its ultimate goal when these /qualities of
dharmakaya are attained).
Ultimately Buddha is none
other than Dharma and
Sangha
But ultimately, Buddha is not other than the Dharma and the Sangha, because the
ultimate Dharma is the absence of attachment. And that's what Buddha has
achieved. And since Buddha is the result of end point of all the bhumis, the
Buddha is also the essence, the quintessence of the Sangha.
We say draldrey, 'result of
elimination', but there's
nothing to eliminate, and
we should not get stuck
with the result either
Let's return to the idea of the result of elimination (draldrey). This will help a lot,
especially if you are following Mipham Rinpoche's commentary. When you read
the words 'result of elimination', just bear in mind that you can't think of
elimination in the sense that there's something to eliminate. And nor should you
get stuck with the result. Although during the path you can literally understand
draldrey as the result of elimination, when we talk about the kham, nature, then
we have to talk and think in a slightly different way. The mahasandhi people
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Third Vajra Point: Sangha
31



in mahasandh), we speak
of 'primordially pure', but
draldrey is a good word -
the window glass that is
pre-dirty and pre-clean
have very good words for this, such as 'primordially pure' (kadag), primordially
eliminated so to speak. But unfortunately we can't use these words now, as this
is Mahayana! Also, words like 'primordially pure' can really cause a lot of
misunderstanding. So there are many reasons why draldrey is actually a very
good term, especially for those who are following the gradual path. Just think
about the window-glass that is pre-dirty and pre-clean. I'm telling you this
again because in the next stanza we will hear words like 'rare and precious gem'
(könchok), and when we hear the word 'rare', we immediately think that there is
an actually, externally existing rare species called the Triple Gem that we should
grab hold of while we have the chance!
We say rare and precious
gem', but it should not be
misunderstood as
something that actually
exists externally
22
འབྱུང་བ་དཀོན་ཕྱིར་དྲི་མེད་ཕྱིར། །
མཐུ་ལྡན་ཕྱིར་དང་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི། །
རྒྱན་གྱུར་ཕྱིར་དང་མཆོག་ཉིད་ཕྱིར། །
འགྱུར་བ་མེདཕྱིར་དཀོན་ན་ཆོག་ཉིད། །
"Rare and supreme" because of being a most rare occurrence, stainless, powerful, the
ornament of the world, the best possible thing and changeless.
Their occurrence is rare, they are free from defilement, they possess power, they are the
adornment of the world, they are sublime and they are unchanging. Thus they are
named) "rare and sublime."
How the Three Jewels are
like a rare and precious
gem
The precious quality of
the Three Jewels does not
change, otherwise they
wouldn't be worthy
objects of refuge.
Therefore the Buddha is
uncompounded
A precious gem is very rare. It is stainless. It has the power to dispel poverty,
and it is an ornament. Likewise the Triple Gem is an ornament for samsara and it
is sublime. One great quality of this precious gem is that it doesn't change.
Unlike a diamond, which is a diamond today but might not be a diamond
tomorrow, it doesn't change. That's why it's precious. Likewise the three gems,
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, are always precious. They do not change. All
compounded phenomena are impermanent, and that will always be the case. But
unlike the impermanence of phenomena, there is no expiry date for the Buddha!
This last quality (gyurwa mechir könchok nyi) again indicates that Buddha is
uncompounded, which is why Maitreya refers to the Three Jewels, and especially
the Buddha, as 'uncompounded'. We will talk about this special meaning of
funcompounded' many times later on. In referring to the Three Jewels as
uncompounded, Maitreya is referring to the fact that their quality doesn't
change. If they did change, they wouldn't be worthy objects of refuge. The
window becomes clean and it becomes dirty, but the fact that it's washable
doesn't change. That is the object of refuge. That's rare. And that's only
source of hope. And the fact that it's washable is also the ornament. It's a very
bad example, but I think it works.
The window is sometimes
clean and sometimes
dirty, but it is always
washable, and that
'washability is the object
of refuge
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Third Vajra Point: Sangha
32



The Last Four Vajra Points
23
དྲི་བཅས་དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་དང་དྲི་མ་མེད། །
དྲི་མེད་སངས་རྒྱས་ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱལ་བའི་མཛད། ། |
གང་ལས་དཀོན་མཆོག་དགེ་བ་གསུམ་འབྱུང་བ། །
དོན་དམ་གཟིགས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ཉིད་དོ། །
That those three, excellent, rare and supreme arise from the suchness, polluted and
unpolluted, the qualities of immaculate Buddhahood and the victor's deeds - such is
the knowledge's domain for those who the ultimale perceive.
The virtuous Three Jewels, which are rare and sublime, arise from suchness bound up
with pollution, from the one free from pollution, from the qualities of unpolluted
Buddhahood and from the deeds of the Victor. This is the object of those who see the
ultimate truth
The four reasons why the
Three Jewels arise:
Now we come to a thorough explanation of why there are the Three Jewels.
There are four reasons:
1. kham when it is
wrapped by defilements
2. When free from them
3. The Buddha's qualities
4. The Buddha's activity
1. When the Buddha-nature is accompanied or wrapped by stains or defilements
2. When the same Buddha-nature is free from these temporary defilements
3. This Buddha has all the great qualities such as the ten powers.
4. And this Buddha manifests, with infinite activity, in order to benefit sentient
beings.
The first reason is
amazing. When it is
wrapped, there is a path
and longing for a model
or reference, thus we have
the Three Jewels
From these four reasons emerges the concept of the "Triple Gem". This stanza is
amazing. It's an amazing teaching. You see, we have the Triple Gem as the
object of refuge. But who appointed it as the object of refuge to which we
should be praying? Maitreya is saying that no one did! So where does it come
from? From kham, the element or Buddha-nature. When this Buddha-nature is
wrapped by defilements, when it is free from defilements, and after that its
activity and its power. There are the four reasons, including the time when it is
wrapped. Because when it is wrapped then there is a path, and then there is
longing for or referring to some kind of model, as I was telling you earlier. And
with this comes the notion of the rare, precious gem. And then Maitreya
concludes by saying that this is beyond our ordinary conception.
All this is beyond our
ordinary conception
For example, the window
is pre-clean and pre-
dirty. It is covered with
temporary dirt and so we
can clean it
For me, the most amazing part of this is the first reason. As we have just seen,
there are four reasons why there are Three Jewels, and the first one is when
Buddha-nature is wrapped by defilements. Again, let me bore you with my
window example. The glass itself is pre-clean and pre-dirty. It has nothing to
do with dirty and clean. It's just pure glass. Now it's wrapped by dirt, temporary
dirt, and therefore it can be cleaned. And after cleaning, we have a certain
quality that we call clean glass'. This is an analogy for the Buddha qualities, like
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
33



The analogy of the
window corresponds to
the Buddha, Dharma and
Sangha
the ten powers. For example, when the glass is clean, then you can see the
leaves falling through the glass. This is like the infinite Buddha activity. These
four exist, and because of that, the Three Jewels exist. The clean glass - that's
Buddha. The fact that the dirt is not glass and therefore it can be cleaned -
that's the Dharma. And then, those window-washers who, with that confidence,
wash the temporary non-glass dirt - that's the Sangha. That's the path.
Maitreya's introduction to the Triple Gem is amazing! I don't think you will find a
greater introduction than this. And ultimately this can only be expressed or
explained by someone who has understood the ultimate nature.
24
དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་པོ་འདི་ཡི་རིགས། །
ཐམས་ཅད་གཟིགས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ། །
དེ་ཡང་རྣམ་བཞི་གོ་རིམས་བཞིན། །
རྒྱུ་བཞི་ཡིས་ནི་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ།
The potential for these three rare and supreme gems is the domain of knowledge of the
omniscient. In respective order there are four reasons for these four aspects being
inconceivable. They are:
The disposition of the Three Rare and Sublime Ones is the object of vision of those
who see everything. Furthermore, these four aspects in the given order are
inconceivable, for the following four reasons:
The four reasons are
inconceivable because
they contain four
paradoxes
The reason for the Triple Gem is going to be explained once again. There are
four reasons, which are understood by the Buddha, and cannot be
understood by ordinary beings.
The Four Paradoxes
25
དག་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་དང་ལྡན་ཕྱིར། །
ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་མེད་དག་ཕྱིར། །
རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་བ་མེད་ཆོས་ཕྱིར། །
ལྷུན་གྲུབ་རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་ཕྱིར། །
Pure yet accompanied by defilement, completely undefiled yet to be purified truly
inseparable qualities, total non-thought and spontaneity.
{The Buddha element) is pure and yet has afflictions. Enlightenment was not afflicted
and yet is purified. Qualities are totally indivisible and yet unapparent]. Activity is
spontaneous and yet without any thought.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
34



He will now explain the reasons in more detail, in terms of four paradoxes.
These are amazing, unbelievable reasons! The four paradoxes are as follows.
The four paradoxes:
1. kham is primordially
pure yet shrouded by
temporal defitements
1. The first paradox is that the kham, the Buddha-nature, is primordially pure,
yet it is accompanied by or shrouded with temporary defilements. That's a
paradox, and that's one reason why there are the Three Jewels.
2. Defilements have never
been part of Buddha-
nature, yet they are
seemingly eliminated
during the path
2. The second paradox is that although the defilements have never been part of
the Buddha-nature, nevertheless when you practice the path, there is
seemingly the elimination of defilements. You really have to listen carefully
to the Uttaratantra - there are not many 'resting' words!
3. All the qualities of the
Buddha exist within
sentient beings even now,
but we don't see them
This doesn't just refer to
the Buddha's mind, but all
of his qualities down to
every single lock of hair
3. The third paradox is that even though all the qualities of the Buddha - such
as the ten powers, 32 major marks, and 80 minor marks - exist within
ordinary beings all the time without increase, decrease or change,
nevertheless we don't see them. For example, one of the 32 major marks is
that the Buddha's lips are as red as the bimpa, a very special fruit. These
qualities are all there all the time, but we don't see them. This is the third
paradox, and it is another reason for the Three Jewels. I am really talking like
a Shentongpa now! We're talking here about all the Buddha qualities, not just
the existence of qualities like his mind, or more dharmakaya kind of things!
It's not only things like that. For the Shentongpas, every single quality of the
Buddha exists within us right now, including each single hair. This is why I
was emphasising the lips. Similarly, when the Buddha extends his tongue, it
covers his whole face. But right now we don't see that - it's a paradox! But
according to the great Shentongpa masters, all these qualities exist right now.
It's a very big statement. When people say, "everybody has the Buddha-
nature", they are usually referring to some kind of potential. It's almost like
having something that you could put into a certain solution, some special
chemicals, which would then enlarge into the Buddha! We think like that! But
that's not what he's saying here. Everything, down to each single hair of the
Buddha, exists right now.
People misunderstand
Buddha-nature as being
some kind of potential
that we all have. But we
have all the enlightened
qualities right now
4. Buddha's compassion
is infinite, yet he has no
intention
4. The fourth paradox is that although the Buddha's compassion is infinite,
omnipresent and all-pervasive, nevertheless the Buddha doesn't have any
intention.
26
རྟོགས་བྱ་རྟོགས་པ་དེ་ཡི་ནི། །
ཡན་ལག་རྟོགས་པར་བྱེད་ཕྱིར་ཏེ།
གོ་རིམ་མ་ཎི་བཞིན་གནསགཅིག་དེ། །
དག་རྒྱུ་གསུམ་ནི་རྐྱེན་ཡིན་ནོ། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
35



Since there is that to be realized, the realization, the attributes of realization and that
which brings realization, then respectively, the first point is the prime cause, that to be
purified, and the remaining three points constitute conditions.
Constituting what must be realized, realization, its attributes and the means to bring it
about, accordingly the first is the cause to be purified and the latter three points are
the conditions.
The first paradox is the
true cause, the other
three are conditions
The explanation of the reasons continues. The Buddha-nature is what needs to
be actualised, understood or realised. And upon realising the Buddha-nature we
attain enlightenment, which is not other than the Buddha-nature. The Buddha
qualities arise as you realise the Buddha-nature. And then with great
compassion you help others to understand this Buddha-nature. Here we are
talking about the four paradoxes once again, and among these four paradoxes,
the first paradox is the true cause, and the three others are conditions. What is it
the cause for? It's the cause for the path, the Three Jewels.
At times, the Buddha
taught the Dharmadhatu
more in terms of
emptiness. Ar other
times more in terms of
the qualities of this
emptiness, such as the
ten powers and 32 major
marks
Now we are really going to enter into a very extensive explanation of the
Buddha-nature. When Buddha taught, the main aim or the quintessence of his
teachings is the Dharmadhatu or space of phenomena (ying). It is the space of all
the dharmas (chökyi ku). At times, the Buddha explains this more in terms of
emptiness. And at times, the Buddha explains this Dharmadhatu more in terms
of the qualities of this emptiness, such as the ten powers and 32 major marks.
And therefore we have the teachings such as Buddha-nature. Mipham Rinpoche
is saying that it's very important for us to understand that emptiness and
Buddha-nature are in union, inseparable. But it's difficult. It's not only difficult
intellectually, but also emotionally, as we always fall into one of the extremes.
We are always forgetting the unity of these two. Some people don't like the
emptiness part, so they fall into a more eternalist way of thinking about Buddha-
nature. And some fall into nihilism by thinking that all these qualities and
powers of the Buddha qualities are not primordially within the space. If you fall
into either of these extremes, you will always encounter problems, not just
intellectually, but also in your practice. We have already covered some of the
comments that Mipham Rinpoche makes here in his commentary.
Emptiness and Buddha-
nature are inseparable.
We have trouble with this
emotionally: some don't
like the emptiness aspect
(and become eternalist);
others don't think Buddha
qualities are primordially
present (nihilist). Either
extreme leads to
problems in your practice
There is a danger that we
may misinterpret kham or
Buddha-nature as being a
*potential
There's another danger when we talk about family, type, race or element, which
some of the early scholars in Tibet fell prey to. This danger is that we might
interpret the element as being some kind of potential. Many scholars think that
all sentient beings have the potential to achieve enlightenment, and they refer to
that potential as the Buddha-nature. But Mipham Rinpoche is not happy with
that, especially if the potential is compounded. Of course there's a different way
to define this. When there is a process of cause and result, usually the cause
transforms into the result. For example, the seed transforms into a shoot,
meaning that the seed ceases to exist. When the seed ceases to exist, this is
referred to birth of the shoot, the existence of the shoot. But Mipham Rinpoche
does not accept that. According to him, and I must say according to Maitreya as
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
36



Buddha-nature is not like
a seed that transforms
into a shoot through
practice. It already has all
the qualities of the shoot
well, it doesn't work like that. Mipham Rinpoche's commentary has a very
profound explanation of this. Many scholars think that we have the Buddha-
nature like a seed, and that as we practice, it then transforms into the fully
enlightened state. But according to Mipham Rinpoche, this Buddha-nature is not
like a seed. It has all the qualities of the shoot. In fact, according to Mipham
Rinpoche, it cannot even be referred to as a shoot, because 'seed' and 'shoot' are
path language.
We cannot even speak of
'seed' and 'shoot', as
these are path language
As Longchenpa said, our
practice only cleans the
dirt. So the Buddha
qualities are all draldrey,
the result of elimination
So as Longchenpa said, all our so-called practice and accumulation of merit -
such as reciting the Vajrasattva mantra and doing all these prostrations - the
only thing that they do is clear defilements. This works quite well with my bad
example of the window. Because if we believe, like some of the early scholars,
that Buddha-nature is a potential, like some kind of seed that transforms into a
shoot, then the consequence is that we would have to say that the window, the
glass, is changing. But it is not. The pre-dirty and pre-clean glass never
changes. All of our washing and spraying only cleans the dirt, and this is why we
say that all the Buddha qualities, including each lock of hair, are the result of
elimination (draldrey).
The Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
27
རྫོགས་སངས་སྐུ་ནི་འཕྲོ་ཕྱིར་དང་
། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་དབྱེར་མེད་ཕྱིར་དང་། །
རིགས་ཡོད་ཕྱིར་ན་ལུས་ཅན་ཀུན།
རྟག་ཏུ་སངས་རྒྱས་སྙིང་པོ་ཅན། །
The Buddha-essence is ever-present in everyone because the dharmakaya of perfect
Buddhahood pervades all, the suchness is undifferentiated and they have the potential.
The perfect Buddhakaya is all-enbracing, suchness cannot be differentiated, and all
beings have the disposition. Thus they always have Buddha-nature.
Ordinary beings can
practice and then
manifest as the Buddha
because they have
Buddha-nature
The first reason that an ordinary being can practice and then manifest as the
perfect Buddha, adorned with all the qualities of perfection, is that ordinary
beings have the Buddha-nature. Therefore they can manifest as the Buddha just
as Siddhartha did, as we saw yesterday.
Samsara and nirvana are
extremeless and thus
equal. Buddha and
sentient beings are
inseparable
The second reason is that all the phenomena of samsara and nirvana are free
from all extremes, and therefore they are equal. They are not separate entities.
So in the ultimate sense, Buddha and sentient beings cannot be separated. You
might have a question at this point. If all phenomena are equal in the ultimate
sense, if they are equally emptiness, does this also includes stones and pieces of
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
37



Do stones also have
kham? To answer this, we
talk about rig or race
wood? Do they have the kham? Do they have this element or nature? This is
where we can talk about rig or race. This quotation is quoted so much, especially
by mahasandhi people. Until now, we have been hearing that there is something
called Buddha-nature, and that problems arise because of the wrapping, the
defilements. Now for the first time, we are going to hear some kind of benefit of
having that wrapping, because wood and stones don't have it. Also, it is our
mind that sees or projects inanimate things like wood and stones. It is never the
other way around. Here we are continuing to slowly construct the definition of
Buddha-nature, what we call family, element, or nature. With three reasons, all
sentient beings have the essence of the Buddha.
Defilements cause our
problems, but they also
have benefits. Stones
don't have this
*wrapping', so they aren't
sentient beings
Day 4 - Introduction
There is no truly existing
self. All that we think
exists is a fabrication of
our minds
We become attached to
our fabrications and think
they are real, which is why
they are referred to as
'extreme'. Any
conception is fanatical!
Buddha Shakyamuni taught us many teachings, including more than 84,000
teachings, three different vehicles and so on. The essence of all of these
teachings is interdependent arising (renching drelwa jungwa). Nothing arises
independently, therefore nothing dwells independently, and so nothing ceases
independently. Therefore there's nothing permanent. There is no truly existing
self. So everything that we think exists, or does not exist, or both or neither - all
these things are fabrications of our mind. We fabricate them and then we
become attached to our fabrications. We don't realise that they are our own
fabrications, so we think that they are real, which is why they are referred to as
"extreme". Basically, every single conception or clinging that we have is some
kind of fanatical process. And many Mahayana sutras teach emptiness or
shunyata to lead us beyond all these extremes and fabrications.
Emptiness is taught in
order to lead us beyond
these extremes
But emptiness is not like
exhaustion of fire. It has
an aspect of unobstructed
wisdom
Our difficulty is that we
think wisdom implies a
cognizer, which implies
the senses and sense
objects
But as l've told you repeatedly, and will tell you again and again, when we talk
about emptiness, it is not like the exhaustion of a fire or evaporation of water. It
is not merely a negation, elimination or denial. It has unobstructed omniscience
(chencha gakpa mepa). This is where things become a little difficult! Emptiness
has an aspect of uninterrupted wisdom. And this is the difficulty, because as
soon as we talk about wisdom, we're talking about a cognizer or cognition. And
the moment we talk about a cognizer or cognition, we start talking about five or
six senses and their sense objects, because that's the only way we are used to
thinking about the idea of a 'cognizer'. When we say, "I recognise him", we are
already talking about our eyes or ear consciousness or something like that. If we
say, "I recognise his voice", then there's cognition. Yesterday we talked about
the Buddha's tongue and teeth and some of you asked why do we need to talk
about this. That's an important question, because when we talk about the body
of the deity, or the body of the Buddha, we are talking about what we call the
ripening of two kinds of accumulations - the accumulation of merit and the
accumulation of wisdom. And we usually we call that a kaya or dimension,
We talk of the Buddha's
tongue and so on because
his body is the ripening of
the two accumulations.
We call it kaya, dimension
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
38



The wisdom aspect of
emptiness isn't subject to
our usual logic of subject,
object and time
As I was saying earlier, as soon as we talk about wisdom, we automatically think
of it as a cognizer. And when we think about a cognizer, we also think about an
object that needs to be cognised. But that kind of logic really doesn't apply to
this kind of wisdom, which is why it is difficult. Our ordinary kind of cognition
has a beginning, middle and end, so it is compounded, and then it becomes
suffering and all that. The moment that we talk about wisdom, our mind thinks
it's something that isn't inanimate. We have to be quite careful here, because
when we say that it's not inanimate, our mind automatically thinks that it's
something animate, which takes us back to the mind again. This is why gyü lama
is really complementary to the mahasandhi teachings, which always say that
mind and wisdom are separate (semdang yeshey).
It is not inanimate, but
nor is it animate in the
ordinary sense of mind.
Uttaratantra complements
mahasandhi, which says
that mind and wisdom are
separate
We need to talk about this
seeming cognizer
because we have to
construct a path. It is an
important part of kham or
tathagatagarbha
You might wonder why we need to struggle to construct this seeming cognizer or
cognition that is somehow not inanimate, but at the same time is not animate in
the ordinary way. We need to do this because we have to construct a path, and
so we have these seven vajra points. And this cognizer is a big aspect of the
kham, the element that we're talking about. It's seemingly a cognizer, but it has
no object, and therefore it's not a subject. And yet it's still a cognizer. It's not
inanimate, but I cannot say that it's animate in the sense of mind.
It is a quality of the
emptiness, dralwey
dreybu
We misunderstand
emptiness as referring to
a state with no function,
but in fact it is full of
function, which is Buddha
activity
This is one aspect of the element or rig, the tathagatagarbha (deshek nyingpo).
That's one way of talking about it, but the safest way to talk about it is always
dralwey dreybu. Let me give you a very bad example. The space where I am
sitting has a quality or function. It's a bit like having an empty flat, where you
can put furniture and stuff like that. If your flat isn't empty then you can't do
that. That's a quality of the emptiness. And this cognizer is not like a couch
potato or piece of stone, something that has no function and doesn't do
anything. You see again, when we talk about emptiness, something beyond
fabrication, we immediately we think of a state that has no function, but that is
absolutely not correct. It is full of function, and this function is what we call
Buddha activity, which is another aspect of the Buddha-nature. Let's go through
some stanzas today. At a glance they are quite easy to understand, but the more
you read and contemplate them, the more difficult they become!
28
སངས་རྒྱས་ཡེ་ཤེས་སེམས་ཅན་ཚོགས་ཞུགས་ཕྱིར། ། Į
རང་བཞིན་དྲི་མེད་དེ་ནི་གཉིས་མེད་དེ། །
སངས་རྒྱས་རིགས་ལ་དེ་འབྲས་ཉེར་བརྟགས་ཕྱིར། །
འགྲོ་ཀུན་སངས་རྒྱས་སྙིང་པོ་ཅན་དུ་གསུངས། ། |
It is said that all beings possess Buddhahood's essence since the Buddhajñana has ever
been in them present, also since the immaculate nature is non-dual and the Buddha-
potential is named after its fruit.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
39



The Buddha has said that all beings have Buddha-nature "since Buddha wisdom is
always present within the assembly of beings, since this undefiled nature is free from
duality, and since the disposition to Buddhahood has been named after its fruit."
Buddha-nature is no
different in samsara or
nirvana, but when we
realise it, we label that
realisation nirvana', so
Buddha has said all
beings have Buddha
nature
The wisdom or dharmakaya of the Buddha dwells within sentient beings, and
therefore one day it manifests. And the stainless Buddha-nature is no different
during samsara and after samsara, which is nirvana. The Buddha-nature doesn't
change at all. When we realise this Buddha-nature, or this Buddha family, then
we label that realisation 'nirvana'. That's why the Buddhas have said that all
sentient beings have the essence of the Buddha. From now on, we will go into a
very extensive explanation of this.
The Ten Aspects (of Buddha-nature)
29
ངོ་བོ་རྒྱུ་ལ་
དུ་འབྲས་ལས་ལྡན་འཇུག་པ་དང་།
གནས་སྐབས་དེ་བཞིན་ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བའི་དོན། །
རྟག་ཏུ་མི་འགྱུར་ཡོན་ཏན་དབྱེར་མེད་ནི།
དོན་དམ་དབྱིངས་ཀྱི་དགོངས་དོན་ཡིན་ཞེས་བྱ། །
The meaning intended by "the ultimate space" should be known through its nature,
cause, result, function, endowments, approach, phases, all-pervasiveness, inalterability
and the qualities' inseparability.
Essence, cause, fruit, function, endowment, manifestation, phases, all-pervasiveness of
suchness, unchangingness, and inseparability of the qualities should be understood as
intended to describe the meaning of the absolute expanse.
Buddha-nature has ten
aspects:
The Buddha-nature has ten different aspects. All this will be explained in detail,
and we will begin with just a summary. By now you know that Maitreya talks
about each topic again and again. First it is introduced and then it is explained.
So be patient. In terms of its ten aspects, Buddha--nature is:
1. Essence
2. Cause
3. Result
4. Action/Function
1. Primordially pure, which is the essence (ngowo).
2. A cause (gyu), when there is motivation.
3. A result (dre), when it is free from stains.
4. An action (ley), where you see or feel suffering and pain, and then act
accordingly. For example you try to get rid of suffering and achieve
happiness. This is because of the rig or kham. As we also discussed
yesterday, because of the kham you know how to harm others and avoid that
harm for yourself.
5. A possessor (denpa), a container or possessor of all the qualities of cause and
result.
5. Possessor/Endowment
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
40



6. Entry/Approach
7. Occasions/Phases
8. All-pervasive
6. An entry (jug), an entrance or approach where practitioners of different
faculties can enter and achieve the result.
7. Different occasions (nekab), or situations. We have Buddha-nature at impure
occasions, pure occasions and so forth.
8. All-pervasive (deshin kuntu drowey dön), because the Buddha-nature is all
pervasive.
9. Unchanging (taktu mingyur), as it is not stained by any other fault or made
more beautiful by any kind of good quality.
10. Non-dual or inseparable (yermey), as you cannot separate emptiness and
clarity and so on.
9. Unchanging
10. Non-dual/Inseparable
These ten aspects are the
real or hidden meaning of
emptiness, which is
Buddha-nature
And this is the real meaning of emptiness (döndam yingkyi kong). It's a very
beautiful phrase. When Buddha taught the Prajnaparamita, he used words like
'emptiness', and the real or hidden meaning of emptiness is actually Buddha-
nature. So now we'll go through these ten aspects of Buddha-nature in more
detail.
#1: Essence
30
རིན་ཆེན་ནམ་མཁའ་ཆུདག་བཞིན། ! 1
རྟག་ཏུ་རང་བཞིན་ཉོན་མོངས་མེད།
1
ཆོས་མོས་ལྷག་པའི་ཤེས་རབ་དང་། 1
ཏིང་འཛིན་སྙིང་བརྩེ་ལས་བྱུང་བ། །
Like the purity of a jewel, space or water, it is always undefiled in essence. It emerges
through aspiration for Dharma, highest prajña, meditation and compassion.
just as a jewel, the sky and water are pure it is by nature always free from poisons.
from devotion to the Dharma, from highest wisdom, and from samadhi and
compassion its realization arises).
#1: Essence. Buddha-
nature is primordially
pure, like a jewel, space
or water
A jewel is naturally or primordially pure. This is not the example of the window
that we talked about yesterday. This is a different example, a better one I guess.
It's much better of course! Mine was just a window-pane. The sky and water are
also naturally pure, like the jewel. When we talk about water being naturally
pure, it seems as though a little bit of India is creeping in here! But the
mahasandhi people also use this kind of example, and it works very well. For
instance, they say that when the mind is stained, it's like water that has become
like ice. But the very water has become ice. The ice and the water are
inseparable. It's the great union. These examples work very well. Likewise
Buddha-nature is primordially pure.
The example of water and
ice is used in mahasandhi
to illustrate defiled mind
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
41



#2: Cause
#2: Cause. There are four
causes, which stem from
and also realise kham:
i) enthusiasm
ii) wisdom
iii) samadhi
iv} compassion
That was the first aspect, essence, and in the second half of the stanza we come
to the second aspect, cause. There are four causes: the first is enthusiasm
(möpa), for example towards the Mahayana. The second is the insight or wisdom
that understands selflessness. Third is samadhi that has bliss, and fourth is
compassion towards sentient beings. These four causes stem from the kham.
But these four causes also actualise or realise the kham. I think that I will use the
word kham more from now on, as it seems that we know what we are talking
about. Again, this is explained in detail.
མཐུ་དང་གཞན་དུ་མི་འགྱུར་དང་
།
བརླན་པའི་ངོ་བོའི་རང་བཞིན་ཕྱིར། །
འདི་དག་ནོར་བུ་རིན་ཆེན་མཁའ།
ཆུ་ཡི་ཡོན་ཏན་ཆོས་མཐུན་ཉིད། །
its qualities resemble those of a valued gem because it is powerful, of space because it
is inalterable and of water because it moistens.
Mielding/ power, not changing into something else, and being a nature that has a
moistening (quality): these fthree) have properties corresponding to those of a precious
gem, the sky and water.
As we clean the dirt, we
say the pre-dirty and pre-
clean glass becomes
clean. In reality, the glass
is neither clean nor dirty,
otherwise the cleaning
process could not happen
This stanza is so beautiful! Yesterday we saw that the Three Jewels are the
objects of veneration and supplication, but they are actually none other than the
Buddha-nature. As the Sakyapas say, because the glass is pre-clean and pre-
dirty, the motivation to clean the dirt is like a supplication. And as you clean the
dirt, the glass becomes clean, and that is because its reality is not dirty and not
clean. That's why relatively you can say it has become clean. If it were either
clean or dirty in reality, one or the other, then the cleaning process could not
happen. Likewise, Buddha-nature has the power to fulfil the wishes of sentient
beings, and that's why it's like a wishfulfilling jewel.
Likewise, Buddha-nature
is like a wish-fulfilling
jewel
Buddha-nature's quality
never changes, like the
sky, and its unobstructed
cognition is compassion,
which moistens like water
Before you begin the path, during the path and after the path, the quality of the
Buddha-nature never changes. Therefore it's like the sky. Now the next one is
interesting! Buddha-nature has unobstructed cognition. Remember, we were
talking about it earlier? This cognition is not other than compassion, which has a
moistening quality, and therefore Buddha-nature is like water.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
42



32
ཆོས་ལ་ཁོང་ཁྲོ་བདག་ལྟ་དང་། །
འཁོར་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱིས་འཇིགས་དང་། །
སེམས་ཅན་དོན་ལ་ལྟོས་མེད་ཉིད། །
འདོད་ཆེན་མུ་སྟེགས་ཉན་ཐོས་དང་། 1
Hostility towards the Dharma the view that there is a seli-entity, fear of samsara's
sufferings and disregard for benefiting beings are the four sorts of obscurations
Enmity towards the Dharma, a view asserting an existing/ sell, fear of samsara's
suffering, and neglect of the welfare or fellow beings are the four veils
33
རང་བྱུང་རྣམས་ཀྱི་སྒྲིབ་རྣམ་བཞི། །
དག་རྒྱུ་ལྷག་པར་མོས་པ་ལ། །
སོགས་པའི་ཆོས་ནི་རྣམ་བཞི་ཉིད། !
Of the desire-bound, the mistaken, Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas respectively. The
causes of purification are four qualities: strong aspiration for Dharma and so on.
Of those with great desire, of tirthikas, Shravakas and Pratyekahuddhas. The cause that
purifies all these veils consists of the four qualities of the path), which are outstanding
devotion and so on.
Four obscurations wrap
the kham
There are four obscurations that are wrapping the kham, the Buddha-nature.
1. Aggression towards
Dharma, for example the
denial that we will all die
2. Clinging to self
1. Aggression towards the Dharma, for example towards the Mahayana path.
The usage of the word 'aggression' here is quite interesting. Ordinary people
have this obscuration. For example, we don't want to hear that we will die
one of these days, or that we are getting old every minute. That is the
aggression. It's a sort of denial.
2. Attachment or clinging to the self.
3. Fear towards samsara, and therefore a desire to attain nirvana.
4. The fourth one is very special to Maitreya, and not included in many other
Mahayana shastras. The fourth obscuration is not relying on actions to
benefit sentient beings.
3. Fear of samsara and a
desire to attain nirvana
4. Not relying on actions
to benefit sentient beings
These obscurations are
found, respectively, in
sentient beings,
extremists, Shravakas,
and Pratyekabuddhas.
They are dispelled by four
different kinds of Dharma
The obscurations are found in different beings. Those who have desire, referring
to sentient beings like us, have the first obscuration. Extremists (muthekpa) - We
could say non-Buddhists, but we have to be politically correct here - have the
second. Shravakas have the third, and Pratyekabuddhas have the fourth. And in
order to dispel these four obscurations, Bodhisattvas apply four different kinds of
Dharma.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
43



34
ཐེག་མཆོག་ལ་མོས་ས་བོན་ཤེས་རབ་ནི། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་བསྐྱེད་མ་དང་བསམ་གཏན་གྱི། །
བདེ་བའི་མངལ་གནས་སྙིང་རྗེའི་མ་མ་ཅན། །
གང་ཡིན་དེ་དག་ཐུབ་པའི་རྗེས་སྐྱེས་སྲས། །
Those whose seed is aspiration for the supreme yana, whose mother is prajña,
originator of the Buddha's qualities, for whom meditative stability is a comfortable
womb and compassion a nanny-these are sons of Buddhas born
The four obscurations
that wrap the kham are
dispelled by four different
kinds of Dharma:
Those whose seed is devotion towards the supreme vehicle, whose mother is analytical
wisdom generating the Buddha qualities, whose abode is the blissful womb of
meditative stability, and whose nurse is compassion, are heirs born to succeed the
Muni.
1. Enthusiasm for the
Mahayana - like the seed
2. Wisdom that
understands emptiness-
like the mother
3. Samadhi with infinite
bliss - like the womb
1. Enthusiasm for the supreme vehicle, the Mahayana vehicle, is like a seed.
This is the antidote towards aggression to the Dharma, the first obscuration.
2. The wisdom that understands selflessness gives birth to all the qualities of
the Buddha, and therefore the view or wisdom of selflessness is like a
mother. It's the antidote to the second obscuration.
3. The supreme samadhi with infinite bliss is like a womb. The womb also
refers to samsara, because this is the antidote to the third obscuration, fear
of samsara. The analogy here is that the womb is a very blissful place, which
is why Bodhisattvas don't have that fear.
4. Compassion is like a nurse, which makes Bodhisattvas always rely on actions
to benefit sentient beings.
4. Compassion, which
makes Bodhisattvas rely
on actions to benefit
sentient beings -- like the
nurse
From these come the children of the Buddha. Now if you have heard many
Mahayana and Shravakayana teachings before, the next stanza will really puzzle
you if not shock you.
#3: Result
གཙང་བདག་བདེ་དང་རྟག་ཉིད་ཀྱི། ། |
ཡོན་ཏན་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ་འབྲས། །
སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཡིད་འབྱུང་ཞི་ཐོབ་པར། །
འདུན་དང་སྨོན་པའི་ལས་ཅན་ནོ། །
its result has the transcendental qualities of purity, identity, happiness and permanence.
its function is revulsion for suffering accompanied by an aspiration, a longing, for
peace.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
44



The fruit is the perfection of the qualities of purity, self happiness and permanence.
Weariness of suffering, longing to attain peace, and devotion towards this aim are the
function,
#3. Result.
The Shravakayana and the
Bodhicharyavatara teach
that things are not clean,
there is no self, etc. But
here we learn that as the
result of applying the four
causes, we obtain
something that is clean,
self, bliss and
permanence
In the gradual path, the Shravakayana, and even in the Bodhicharyavatara, we
hear words like "things are not clean". We are reminded that a body is full of
shit, pus, blood and so on, and all the things that we think are clean and pristine
are actually not clean. Remember that kind of mind training? And we also hear
that there is no self, no ultimate independent happiness, and of course there is
nothing that is permanent. And yet here we hear that as the result of applying
the four causes that we've just talked about, we will obtain something that is
clean, self, bliss and permanence.
However these qualities
are 'transcendental'. For
example, the 'purity is
not ordinary purity but
transcendental purity
(which is beyond both
pure and impure)
But the word 'transcend' is quite important here, as in transcendental paramita'
(paroltu chinpa). These are transcendental purity (tsangwey paroltu chinpa),
transcendental bliss (dewey paroltu chinpa), transcendental permanence (tagpey
paroltu chinpa) and transcendental sublime identity (dag dampey paroltu chinpa).
For example, transcendent purity is not really clean in the ordinary sense of
clean, but something that transcends that kind of cleanliness. It's a bit like this.
In the Heart Sutra, for instance, it talks about how "form is emptiness", and most
of the Madhyamika texts are based on that first aspect, namely form is
emptiness. By contrast, gyü lama concentrates on "emptiness is form". This will
be explained a little later. But before that, let's talk about result and action. One
of the functions of kham, the Buddha-nature or element, is that one will feel
revulsion towards suffering. Because there is Buddha-nature, one will have
longing and aspiration for peace, happiness, and enlightenment.
Madhyamika concentrates
on "form is emptiness",
and Uttaratantra
concentrates on
"emptiness is form"
Through the function of
the kham, we feel
revulsion to samsara and
longing for enlightenment
36
འདི་དག་འབྲས་ནི་མདོར་བསྡུ་ན། །
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ལ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག །
རྣམ་པ་བཞི་ལས་བཟློག་པ་ཡི། །
གཉེན་པོས་རབ་ཏུ་ཕྱེ་བ་ཉིད། ། 1
in brief the result of these represents the remedy to both the four ways of straying from
dharmakaya and to their four antidotes.
in brief, the fruit of these (purifying causes} fully divides into the remedies for the
antidotes), which in their tum} counteract the four aspects of wrong beliets with regard
to the dharmakaya.
The four causes give the
result dharmakaya, which
is the absence of the four
wrong views, and which is
clean, blissful, permanent
and self
The four causes that we talked about give a result, which is dharmakaya.
Dharmakaya is the absence of these four wrong views. So the four causes give
the result of dharmakaya, which is absent of dirty, no-self, pain and
impermanent. Thus we obtain the dharmakaya that is clean, blissful, permanent:
and self. This is being taught metaphorically, so to speak.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
45



37
དེ་ནི་རང་བཞིན་དག་ཕྱིར་དང་། །
བག་ཆགས་སྤང་ཕྱིར་གཙང་བ་ཡིན།
1
This is purity because its nature is pure and all karmic impurities have been removed.
The (Dharmakayal is purity, since its nature is pure and ſeven the remaining imprints
are fully removed.
Dharmakaya is
primordially pure, pre-
clean and pre-dirty. But
like washing the window,
if we apply the path, we
experience purification of
the dirt
Once again this is explained in more detail. Why is the dharmakaya clean?
Because dharmakaya is primordially pure. It has not been stained even for a
moment with any kind of dirt. Here we are talking about the pre-dirty and pre-
clean kind of cleanliness. And the second line says if you apply the path, then
seemingly once again you experience the purification of the dirt. Just like when
you apply washing methods, once again you experience the clean glass. But this
is only based on the path. The glass itself still has no idea that it has ever
experienced dirt. This is what we call the paramita of cleanliness, the
transcendental cleanliness.
We experience clean
glass, but the glass itself
never experienced dirt.
This is transcendental
cleanliness
37 (contd.)
1
བདག་དང་བདག་མེད་སྤྲོས་པ་དག་
ཉེ་བར་ཞི་བས་དམ་པའི་བདག་
It is true identity because all complications of "self" or "no-self" have been absolutely
quelled.
It is true selt, since all conceptual elaboration in terms of self and non-self is totally
stilled.
Here we use the word
dharmakaya instead of
kham, as we are referring
to the result
Why is the dharmakaya a self? Notice that I'm using the word 'dharmakaya'. I'm
actually talking about the kham, but I am using the word 'dharmakaya', because
at the moment we are talking about the category of result. We are talking about
the same thing, but now we're talking about pre-clean and pre-dirty, which is
why I have to use the word 'dharmakaya'. Dharmakaya is beyond the self that is
imputed by extremists, and it is also beyond the selflessness is beyond
selflessness that is imputed by the Shravakas and all the lower paths - by all
paths, actually. That is the transcendental self. I feel like I'm teaching
Purvamimasa or Vedanta right now!
Dharmakaya is beyond all
ideas of self or
selflessness. This is
transcendental self
38
ཡིད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་ཕུང་པོ་དང་
། ། 1
དེ་རྒྱུ་ལོག་ཕྱིར་བདེ་བ་ཉིད། །
It is happiness through the five aggregates, which are of a mental nature, and also their
causes' demise.
it is true happiness, since leven} the aggregates of mental nature and their causes are
reversed.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
46



Dharmakaya is beyond
aggregates and their
cause, ignorance. Hence
there is no suffering.
This is transcendental
bliss
The dharmakaya has no aggregates, not even the subtlest aggregates, nor the
cause of such aggregates, which is ignorance. When there is no ignorance and
no result of ignorance, namely the aggregates, there is no suffering. That is
transcendental bliss.
38 (contd.)
འཁོར་བ་དང་ནི་མྱ་ངན་འདས། །
མཉམ་པ་ཉིད་དུ་རྟོགས་ཕྱིར་རྟག །
it is permanence, since the sameness of samsara and nirvana has been realized.
It is permanence, since the cycle
one.
existence and the state beyond pain are realized as
Since samsara and nirvana
are inseparable,
dharmakaya is beyond
time. This is
transcendental
permanence
In the state of the dharmakaya, there is no such thing as someone who was once
upon a time a samsaric being and then later achieved enlightenment. Again, we
are talking about pre-dirty and pre-clean, the same thing. Therefore, there is no
change, for example from a being in samsara to a being in nirvana. And that
unchangingness is transcendental permanence.
39
བདག་མེད་མ་ལུས་ཤེས་རབཀྱིས་བཅད་དེ། །
སེམས་ཅན་སྲེད་ཕྱིར་བརྩེ་ལྡན་ཞི་ཐོབ་མིན། །
དེ་ལྟར་བློ་བརྩེ་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཐབས་བརྟེན་ནས། །
འཕགས་པ་འཁོར་བའམ་མྱ་ངན་འདའ་མི་འགྱུར། །
Those of compassionate love have, with prajña, completely cut through all self-
cherishing. They will not want to enter personal nirvana because they dearly care for
every being. Hence by reliance upon these means to enlightenment - wisdom and
compassion - the deeply-realized are neither in samsara nor personal nirvana's
quiescence.
Their analytical wisdom has cut all self-cherishing without exception. Yet, cherishing
beings, those possessed of compassion do not adhere to peace. Relying on
understanding and compassionate love - the means to enlightenment - noble ones will
neither fabide) in samsara nor in a {limited} rirvana.
Because of wisdom and
compassion, a
Bodhisattva dwells neither
in samsara nor nirvana
Now, we are talking about the path, and how a Bodhisattva transcends all kinds
of extremes. A Bodhisattva who is on the path has cut all kinds of craving and
attachment to the self with the sword of wisdom. Therefore, a Bodhisattva does
not dwell in samsara. Nevertheless, a Bodhisattva craves for sentient beings out
of compassion. Therefore a Bodhisattva also does not fall into the extreme of
nirvana. Because of wisdom and method - with the wisdom that understands
selflessness and with compassion - a sublime being, a Bodhisattva, does not
dwell in samsara and nirvana.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
47



#4: Action/Function
40
གལ་ཏེ་སངས་རྒྱས་ཁམས་མེད་ན། །
སྡུག་ལ་སྐྱོ་བར མི་འགྱུར་ཞིང་། །
མྱ་ངན་འདས་ལ་འདོད་པ་དང་། །
དོན་གཉེར་སྨོན་པའང་མེད་པར་འགྱུར། !
Were there no Buddha-nature there would be no discontent with suffering nor desire,
efforl and aspiration for nirvana.
If the Buddha element were not present, there would be no remorse over suffering.
There would be no longing for nirvana, nor striving and devotion towards this aim.
#4: Action/Function. If
there were no kham, we
would not feel discontent
with samsara or long for
nirvana
We're still talking about the ten points or aspects of the kham. We've covered the
third aspect, which is the result (dreybu). Now the fourth, which is the action or
activity of Buddha-nature (ley). If there were no kham or element, then we would
not feel sad with suffering. Likewise, we would also not long for and work
towards peace or nirvana.
སྲིད་དང་མྱ་ངན་འདས་ལ་དེའི། །
སྡུག་བདེའི་སྐྱོན་ཡོན་མཐོང་བ་འདི། །
རཾགས་ཡོདི་ལས་ཡིན་གང་ཕྱིར་དེ།
རིགས་མེད་དག་ལ་མེད་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
Perception of suffering, samsara's fault, and happiness, nirvana's quality, is due to the
potential's presence. Why should this be? Without such potential it will not be
present.
That with regard to existence and nirvana their respective fault and quality are seen,
that suffering is seen as the fault of existence and happiness as the quality of nirvana,
stems from the presence of the disposition to Buddhahood. "Why so?" in those who are
devoid of disposition, such seeing does not occur.
The intellect that sees the
fault of samsara and
quality of nirvana only
arises because of kham
We understand that samsara is suffering? is suffering, and that samsaric or cyclic
existence is painful. And we think that we will attain bliss if we transcend this
cyclic existence. The kind of intellect that sees the fault of samsara and the
quality of nirvana only arises because there is rig, kham or Buddha-nature. Just
as rice seeds cannot give birth to barley shoots, those who don't have this kind
of seed, this kham, will not have this kind of aversion or longing. This will be
explained further.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
48



#5: Container/Endowment
42
རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེ་བཞིན་དཔག་མེད་པའི། །
ཡོན་ཏན་རིན་ཆེན་མི་ཟད་གནས། །
དབྱེར་མེད་ཡོན་ཏན་དང་ལྡན་པའི། ། 1
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཕྱིར་མར་མེ་བཞིན། །
Like a great ocean - an inexhaustible abode containing gems of inestimable qualities.
Like a lamp-flame because this essence is endowed with inseparable qualities.
Like the great sea it holds qualities immeasurable, precious and inexhaustible, its
essence holds indivisible properties. Thus the element is similar to a lamp.
#5: Container. Buddha.
nature contains all things
like an ocean, and its
qualities are inseparable
like a lamp
Now we come to the fifth aspect, container or possessor (denpa). An ocean is a
container. It contains all kinds of waters, rivers and so on, and it also acts as a
container for all kinds of beings, jewels, and all kinds of other things. Likewise,
Buddha-nature is a container. It is the container of everything. Buddha-nature
is also like a lamp, because it includes all the enlightened qualities such as
omniscience and clairvoyance and all the qualities that stem from wisdom.
43
ཆོས་སྐུ རྒྱལ་བཀཾ ཡེ་ཤེས་དང་། །
ཐུགས་ཟླའིཁམས་ནི་བསྡུས་པé་ཕྱིར། །
སྣོད་དང་རིན་ཆེན་ཆུ ཡིས་ནི། །
རྒྱ་མཚོ་དང་ནི་མཚུངས་པར་བསྟན། །
Because it contains the essence of dharmakaya, the jñana of the Victors and great
compassion, then, through environment, jewels and its waters, it has been taught as
being similar to an ocean.
Unitying the element of dharmakaya, a victor's wisdom and great compassion, it is
shown as being similar to the sea by the vessel, the gems and the water.
Buddha-nature contains
the four causes of
dharmakaya, so it is like a
container, a jewel and
water. Therefore it is
taught using the analogy
of an ocean
The cause of the dharmakaya, such as enthusiasm towards the Mahayana path
the cause of the wisdom of the Buddha, such as the understanding of
selflessness - and the cause of Buddha activity, which is compassion - all of
these causes exist within the Buddha-nature. Therefore, Buddha-nature is like a
container, like a jewel, and like water. For these three reasons - container, jewel
and moisture - Buddha-nature is taught using the analogy of an ocean.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
49



44
444
དྲི་མེད་གནས་ལ་མངོན་ཤེས་དང་། །
ཡེ་ཤེས་དྲི་མེད་དེ་ཉིད་དང་།
།
རྣམ་དབྱེར་མེད་ཕྱིར་མར་མེ་ཡི། །
སྣང་དང དྲོ་མདོག་ཆོས་མཚུངས་ཅན། །
Since direct cognition, jñana and freedom from stain are inseparable in the immaculate
ground they are compared to the light, heat and colour of a flame.
Clairvoyance, primordial wisdom and absence of pollution are totally indivisible and
native to the unstained abode. Thus it has properties corresponding to the light, heat
and colour of a lamp.
Buddha-nature is like a
lamp because it
illuminates, it has
warmth, and its radiance
is incorruptible
All that we have said before is explained again here. Buddha-nature is stainless
from the beginning. Therefore it has all the five types of clairvoyance, undefiled
wisdom and stainless quality. It is like a lamp, because it illuminates, it has
warmth and its colour or radiance is unchangeable or incorruptible.
#6: Entry
4
སོ་སོའི་སྤྱི་འཔགས་རྫོགས་སངས་ཀྱི། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་དབྱེའི་འཇུག་པ་ལས། །
དེ་ཉིད་གཟིགས་པས་སེམས་ཅན་ལ། །
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྙིང་པོ་འདི་བསྟན་ཏོ། །
Suchness is approached in different ways by ordinary beings, the deeply-realized and
the completely-enlightened. Hence the seers of the true nature have taught that all
beings have this Buddha-essence.
Based upon the manifestation of suchness dividing into that of an ordinary being, that of
a noble one, and that of a perfect Buddha, He who Sees Thatness has explained the
nature of the Victor to beings.
#6: Entry. Buddha-nature
acts as an entry because
all beings equally enter
into Buddha-nature
Now we come to the sixth aspect, entry. Why does Buddha-nature also act as an
entry? Because ordinary beings, sublime beings on the path, and Buddhas all
equally enter into Buddha-nature. This is why Buddha taught Buddha-nature.
.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
50



46
སོ་སོ་སྐྱེ་བོ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག །
བདེན་པ་མཐོང་བ་བཟློག་པ་སྟེ། །
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ཇི་ལྟ་བཞིན། །
ཕྱིན་ཅི་མ་ལོག་སྤྲོས་མེད་ཉིད། །
Ordinary beings go in a wrong direction. Those who see the truth revert from this and
the tathagatas face it just as it is, unerringly and without conceptual complication.
[lt manifests asi perverted /views in ordinary beings, (as) the reversal of these in those
who see the truth, and (it manifests} as it is, in an unperverted way, and as freedom
from elaboration in a tathagata.
The three different kinds
of beings look at or enter
the same thing, but
differently
1. Ordinary beings look at
the glass (i.e. Buddha-
nature) and think it's dirty
and needs cleaning
There are three different kinds of beings: ordinary beings, sublime beings on the
path, and beings who are already enlightened. They are all looking at or entering
the same thing. When ordinary beings look at Buddha-nature, they have
confusion and misunderstanding. When sublime beings, those who are on the
path, look at the Buddha-nature, they see the truth. So they are opposite from
ordinary beings. Again, let's go back to the example of the glass, as it always
seems to work. Ordinary beings look at the glass and think it's dirty and needs
cleaning. Sublime beings, those who are on the path, know that's wrong. They
know the glass is not dirty (i.e. the dirt is not part of the glass), and therefore it
can be cleaned. Buddha looks at the same glass, and sees it as pre-dirty and
pre-clean. So the burden of the cleaning, which comes from thinking that it has
become dirty, doesn't even exist for him. This is why it says that tathagatas see
it as it is, without any kind of fabricated extremes. That is the entry.
2. Sublime beings on the
path know it's not dirty,
and thus can be cleaned
3. Buddha sees it as pre-
dirty and pre-clean so
does not even think of
cleaning it
#7: Occasions
མ་དག་མ་དག་དག་པ་དང་། །
ཤིན་ཏུ་རྣམ་དག་གི་རིམས་བཞིན། །
སེམས་ཅན་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་དང༌། །
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ཞེས་བརྗོད་དོ། །
The impure, those both pure and impure and those absolutely perfectly pure are known
respectively as ordinary beings, Bodhisattvas and tathagatas.
The unpuritied, the both unpurified and purified, and the utterly purified {phases) are
expressed in their given order (by names "being", "Bodhisattva" and "tathagata."
#7: Occasions/Phases.
There are three occasions,
corresponding to the
three kinds of beings
impure, both impure and
pure, and pure
Now the seventh aspect, occasions. There are three kinds of occasions: when the
Buddha-nature is impure, stained by defilements (madag); when the Buddha-
nature is still stained but in the process of being cleaned (madag dagpa); and
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
51



when Buddha-nature is absolutely free from stains (shintu namdag). These
occasions correspond to the state of ordinary sentient beings, the state of
Bodhisattvas and the state of Tathagatas.
48
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ལ་སོགས་པའི་དོན། །
འདི་དྲུག་གིས་ནི་བསྡུས་པ་ཡི། །
ཁམས་ནི་གནས་སྐབས་གསུམ་དག་ཏུ།
མིང་གསུམ་གྱིས་ནི་བསྟན་པ་
པ་ཡིན། །
The Buddha-nature, summarized by the six points on essence and so on, is explained
through three phases and by means of three terms.
The element as contained in the six topics of "essence" and so on is explained in the
light of three phases by means of three names.
The first six aspects of
Buddha-nature can be
subdivided in terms of
three occasions. For
example, there are three
types of entry that
correspond to three
occasions, but in reality,
they are all the same
For each of the first six aspects of Buddha-nature that we talked about - namely
essence, cause, result, action, possessor, and entry - we can make a subdivision
or categorisation based on these three occasions. For example, when we were
talking about entry, we talked about three ways of entering the Buddha-nature.
These categories correspond to the three different kinds of occasions. However
in reality, you cannot really say there is any difference, as they are exactly the
same.
#8: All-pervasive
49
ཇི་ལྟར་རྟོག་མེད་བདག་ཉིད་ཅན། 1
ནམ་མཁའ་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྗེས་སོང་ལྟར།
སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་དྲི་མེད་དབྱིངས། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ་བ་ཉིད། །
just as space, concept-free by nature, is all-embracing, so also is the immaculate space,
the nature of mind, all-pervading.
just as space, which is by nature free from thought, pervades everything, the undefiled
expanse, which is the nature of mind, is all-pervading.
#8: All-pervasiveness.
Buddha-nature is all
pervasive and free from
conceptions, like the sky
Now we are explaining the eighth aspect, all-pervasiveness. Why is the Buddha-
nature all-pervasive? For example, the sky has no conceptions, and therefore it
doesn't have any obscurations. And it is everywhere, it is all-pervasive. Likewise
the nature of the mind, the stainless space or tathagatagarbha, is all-pervasive.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
$2



50
དེ་སྤྱིའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅེས་པ་དང་། །
ཡོན་ཏན་མཐར་ཐུག་ཁྱབ་པ་སྟེ། །
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ་དམན་པ་དང་། །
བར་མ་མཆོག་ལ་ནམ་མཁའ་བཞིན། ། |
This, the general characteristic of all, permeates the good, the bad and the ultimate, like
space permeates all forms whether lesser, mediocre or perfect.
As the general feature for everything, it embraces (those with faults, those with
qualities and those in whom qualities are ultimate just as space (pervades everything
visible, be it of inferior, average or supreme appearance.
When we speak of its all-
pervasiveness, we refer to
Buddha-nature as ying,
the stainless space
The stainless space is a
characteristic of all
beings, so it is all-
pervasive
Now we are referring to the Buddha-nature with a different term: ying or
'stainless space'. We don't use the term 'dharmakaya' any longer, because we
are now talking about a different occasion or aspect. Now we use the term
stainless space' because we are talking about its all-pervasive quality. This
stainless space is the characteristic of everything. It is a characteristic of sentient
beings that have faults and defilements, Bodhisattvas who have enlightened
qualities, and Buddhas who are completely beyond the path. This stainless space
is characteristic to all of them, and so it's all-pervasive. Again, this is explained
further. Imagine that we take three containers, for instance a clay pot that is not
a very precious container, a copper pot that is slightly better than the clay
container, and a golden pot that is the best container. The quality of the space
within all these containers is exactly the same.
Similarly, the quality of
the space within
containers of clay, copper
and gold is identical
#9: Unchanging
ཉེས་པ་གློ་བུར་དང་ལྡན་དང་།
ཡོན་ཏན་རང་བཞིན་ཉིད་ལྡན་ཕྱིར། ། 1
ཇི་ལྟར་སྔར་བཞིན་ཕྱིར་དེ་བཞིན། །
འགྱུར་བ་མེད་པའི་ཆོས་ཉིད་དོ། །
Since the faults are but accidental whereas its qualities are part of its very character, it is
the changeless reality, the same after as it was before.
Having faults that are adventitious and qualities that are its nature, it is afterwards the
same as before. This is Dharmata ever unchanging.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
53



52
ཇི་ལྟར་ནམ་མཁའ་ཀུན་སོང་བ། །
ཕྲ་ཕྱིར་ཉེ་བར་གོས་པ་མེད། །
དེ་བཞིན་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ།།
གནས་འདི་ཉེ་བར་གོས་པ་མེད། །
1
just as space pervades all but remains absolutely unaffected, because of its extreme
subtlety, similarly this, present in all beings, remains absolutely taint-free.
Though space permeates everything, it is never polluted, due to its subtlety. Likewise
the (Dharmadhatul in all beings does not suffer the slightest pollution.
#9: Unchangingness. The
defitements are
adventitious but the result
of their elimination,
Buddha-nature, is
unchanging
Now, we come to the ninth aspect, permanence or unchangingness. Defilements
have the characteristic of loburwa, which can be translated as 'temporary' or
'adventitious'. It can also be translated as 'sudden', but it doesn't really mean
that here. 'Temporary' or 'adventitious' are good words, even better than
loburwa. We are referring to something that can be removed (drima dralrung).
The quality of the dirt or the defilements is that they are temporary, removable,
and adventitious. But after they have been removed, the absence of the
defilements cannot be removed. That quality is the nature, and cannot be
removed. This is a very important phrase, 'the quality is the nature' (yönten
rangshin). Again, we're back to the result of elimination! The only way to remove
it is bring back the defilements. The result of elimination, the result of removing
something removable, cannot be removed! Therefore, Buddha-nature cannot
change. From the time when Buddha-nature is dwelling in samsara, through
practice for aeons of lifetimes, until finally reaching enlightenment, the khamor
Buddha-nature hasn't changed a bit. Again, this will be explained extensively.
Throughout samsara and
nirvana, Buddha-nature is
unchanging
For example, although
space pervades all forms,
space is unchanging and
undisturbed by these
forms. Similarly, Buddha-
nature pervades sentient
beings, yet is undisturbed
by their defilements
For example, sky or space is everywhere. It's all-pervasive. It pervades all kinds
of forms, but because sky or space is very subtle, forms such as trees and
mountains do not stain, disturb or interfere with this space. And the downfalls of
a form, such as when the form gets deformed (e.g. when placed beside another
form), will not affect the space. Likewise, even though Buddha-nature exists
within sentient beings, sentient beings' downfalls such as aggression and
passion will not stain the Buddha-nature. This is explained even more.
ཇི་ལྟར་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ། ) 1
ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་ནི་སྐྱེ་ཞིང་འཇིག །
དེ་བཞིན་འདུས་གབྱས་་དབྱིངས་ལ། །
དབང་པོ་རྣམས་ནི་སྐྱེ་ཞིང་འཇིག །
just as universes always arise and disintegrate in space, so also do the senses arise and
disintegrate in the uncreated space.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
54



just as at all times worlds arise and disintegrate in space, the senses arise and
disintegrate in the uncreated expanse.
All phenomena arise,
dwell and cease within
space, but space itself
does not arise, dwell or
cease
For example, everything in this universe arises, dwells and then ceases to exist
within this space. But the space itself has no arising, no dwelling and no
cessation. Likewise, within the uncompounded space, within Buddha-nature,
sentient beings come and go. They become ignorant, meet Dharma, get
inspired, and practice. Practice goes wrong, practice goes right, and they dwell
on the path. There is progress. There is failure. All this happens, but Buddha-
nature doesn't change.
Likewise, beings come
and go on the path, but
Buddha-nature does not
change
54
ཇི་ལྟར་ནམ་མཁའ་མེ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས། །
སྔོན་ཆད་ནམ་ཡང་ཚིག་པ་མེད། །
དེ་བཞིན་འདི་ནི་འཆི་བ་དང་། 1
ན་དང་རྒ་བའི་མེས་མི་འཚིག །
just as space has never been consumed by fire, likewise this is never consumed by
death, sickness and ageing's fires.
Space is never burnt by fires. Likewise this (Dharmadhatul is not burt by the fires of
death, sickness and aging.
Space is not burned by
fire. Similarly, Buddha-
nature is not burned by
the three fires of
sickness, old age, and
death
Space or sky has never been burned by fire. Trees have been burned, houses
have been burned, human beings have been burned - all of this. But the space or
sky car be burned. Likewise, Buddha-natu not be burned by three kinds
of fire - death, old age and sickness.
55
རླུང་ནི་མཁའ་ལ་ར་
ས་ནི་ཆུ་ལ་ཆུ་རླུང་ལ། །
བ་རབ་ཏུ་གནས།
མཁའ་ནི་རླུང་དང་ཆུ་དག་དང་
།
ས་ཡི་ཁམས་ལ་ག
པ་ལ་གནས་མ་ཡིན། །
Earth is supported by water, water by air, air is supported by space but space is
supported neither by air, water nor earth.
Earth rests upon water and water upon wind. Wind fully rests on space. Space does
not rest upon any of the elements of wind, water or earth.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
55



56
1
དེ་བཞིན་ཕུང་པོ་ཁམས་དབང་རྣམས།
ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་དག་ལ་གནས།
པ་ཚུལ་བཞིན་མིན།
ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་ལ་རྟག་ཏུ་གནས། །
ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་
in a similar way the aggregates, the elements and the senses are based upon karma and
defilements. Karma and the detilements are always based upon a mode of thought
which is wrong.
Likewise skandhas, elements and senses are based upon karma and mental poisons.
Karma and poisons are always based upon improper conceptual activity.
57
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་ཡིད་བྱེད་ནི། །
སེམས་ཀྱི་དག་པ་ལ་རབ་གནས། །
སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་ཆོས་རྣམས་ནི།
ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་ཡང་གནས་པ་
ང་གནས་པ་མེད། །
This improper mode oi thoughi has its basis in the mind's purity whereas the true nature
of mind has no basis in any of the many phenomena.
The improper conceptual activity fully abides on the purity of mind. Yet, the nature of
the mind itself has no basis in all these phenomena.
The earth, water and air
elements depend on
space, but space doesn't
depend on the other
elements
The earth element relies on the water element. The water element depends on
the air element, and the air element depends on the space element. But space is
not dependent on air, water or earth. Likewise, the skandhas, dhatus and sense-
objects, like the five aggregates, consciousnesses, and objects such as form and
sound - all these depend on karma and emotion. And karma and emotion
depend on wrong views, such as clinging to the self as a truly existing thing,
clinging to phenomena as permanently existing, and all that. But what does this
improper thought or wrong view depend on? Or maybe more literally, where
does it dwell? In only one place - Buddha-nature. It's like if you dream about an
elephant. Even though the dream-elephant does not exist in reality, you still
experience it. Likewise, although wrong views do not exist ultimately, you
nevertheless experience them. And this experience resides in Buddha-nature.
Likewise, aggregates,
emotions and wrong
views depend on Buddha-
nature. Although they do
not exist, you experience
them, and this experience
resides in Buddha-nature
Buddha-nature is not the
cause of wrong views, but
they have nowhere else to
dwell, hence we say this
Like space, Buddha-
nature doesn't depend on
aggregates, emotions or
wrong views
Mipham Rinpoche stresses here that it is not as though the Buddha-nature is the
cause of this wrong view. However, just as aggregates and dhatus come from
karma and emotion, and karma and emotion come from wrong view, we need a
place for wrong views to dwell. And other than Buddha-nature, there is none.
That's why we have to speak in this way. We are not saying that Buddha-nature
is producing these kinds of wrong view. Also the Buddha-nature itself, the
space, does not dwell on any of the above things - not on aggregates, dhatus,
ayatanas, karma or emotions - none! This is explained in more detail.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
56



$3
ས་དང་འདྲ་བ་ཕུང་པོ་དང་། །
སྐྱེ་མཆེད་ཁམས་རྣམས་ཤེས་པར་བྱ། །
ཆུ་ཁམས་དང་འདྲ་ལུས་ཅན་གྱི། །
ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་ཤེས་བྱ་སྟེ།
The aggregates, entrances and elements should be known as being similar to earth. The
karma and defilements of beings are to be known as similar to water.
The skandhas, entrances and elements are to be known as resembling earth. Karma
and the mental poisons of beings should be envisaged as the water element.
6)
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་ཡིད་བྱེད་ནི། །
རླུང་གི་ཁམས་དང་འདྲ་བར་ལྟ། །
རང་བཞིན་ནམ་མཁའི་ཁམས་བཞིན་དུ། །
དེ་གཞི་ཅན་མིན་གནས་པ་མེད།
The improper mode of thought is similar to air whereas the true nature is like the
element of space - it has no base and no abiding.
improper conceptual activity is viewed as being similar to the element of wind. (Mind's)
nature, as the element of space, has no ground and no place of abiding.
()
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་ཡིད་བྱེད་ནི།
སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་ལ་གནས་ཏེ། །
ཚུལ་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་ཡིད་བྱེད་ཀྱིས། །
ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་རབ་ཏུ་ཕྱེ། །
The improper mode of thought abides within the true nature of mind. This improper
mode of thought gives rise to kama and the defilements.
The improper conceptual activity rests upon the nature of the mind. Improper
conceptual activity brings about all the classes of karma and mental poisons.
ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་ཆུ་ལས་ནི། །
ཕུང་པོ་སྐྱེ་མཆེད་ཁམས་རྣམས་འབྱུང་། །
དེ་འཇིག་པ་དང་ཆགས་པ་ལྟར།
སྐྱེ་དང་འཇིག་པར་འགྱུར་བ་ཡིན། །
From karma and defilements' waters arise the aggregates, entrances and elements,
arising and disintegrating just as everything begins and has an end.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
57



From the water of karma and the mental poisons the skandhas, entrances and elements
arise. As this world arises and disintegrates, they will arise and disintegrate as well.
Aggregates, emotions and
wrong views correspond
to the earth, water and air
elements. Buddha-nature
is like the sky.
We were just talking about the elements, about how the earth element depends
on water and so forth, and all this is explained more thoroughly here. The five
aggregates, twelve ayatanas and eighteen dhatus are all like the earth element.
Karma and emotions are like the water element. Wrong views and improper
thoughts are like the air element. And the Buddha-nature is like the sky.
Therefore Buddha-nature is not dependent on any of the other elements. Here
we are explaining the meaning of 'temporary' again. Wrong views, such as
clinging to phenomena as permanent, dwell as obscurations to this Buddha-
nature. And that's like the air element which produces or acts as a container for
the next element, which is the water element. Therefore, the air element which is
like wrong views gives birth to the water element which is like emotions and
karma. And the water element which is like karma and emotions produces or
gives birth to aggregates, ayatanas and so on, which are like the earth element.
And just as all these gross elements arise, dwell and cease to exist, the dhatus,
skandhas, karma and kleshas also arise, dwell and cease to exist, but this does
not interfere with space at all.
Just as the gross elements
arise and cease within
space, the aggregates,
karma and kleshas arise
and cease within Buddha-
nature without interfering
with it at all
62
1
སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་ནམ་མཁའ་ཡི།
ཁམས་ལྟར་རྒྱུ་མེད་རྐྱེན་མེད་དེ། །
ཚོགས་པ་མེད་ཅིང་སྐྱེ་བ་དང་
། །
འཇིག་དང་གནས་པའང་ཡོད་མ་ཡིན།
The nature of mind is like the space element: it has neither causes, nor conditions nor
these in any combination, nor any arising, destruction or abiding.
The nature of mind as the element of space does not depend on a gathering of these.
it has neither arising, cessation, not abiding.
The nature of the mind is
like space, not dependent
on causes or conditions.
So it is beyond arising.
dwelling and cessation
This stanza explains the unchanging aspect of Buddha-nature a bit more. The
nature of the mind is like space. It does not depend on cause and it is not
influenced by conditions. There is no compounding of different entities to make
the Buddha-nature. Therefore it does not having arising, cessation and dwelling.
སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་འོད་གསལ་གང་ཡིན་པ། །
དེ་ནི་ནམ་མཁའ་བཞིན་དུ་འགྱུར་མེད་དེ། ། !
ཡང་དག་མིན་རྟོག་ལས་བྱུང་འདོད་ཆགས་སོགས།
གློ་བུར་དྲི་མས་དེ་ཉོན་མོངས་
པས་དེ་ཉོན་མོངས་མི་འགྱུར། 1
1
This true nature of the mind-clarity, is, like space, unchanging; not becoming defiled by
desire and so on, passing impurities which from improper thinking spring.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
58



This clear and luminous nature of mind is as changeless as space. It is not afflicted by
desire and so on, the adventitious stains, which are sprung from incorrect thoughts.
The clarity and luminosity
of Buddha-nature is like
the sky. It cannot be
stained by adventitious
defilements like clouds
The clarity and luminosity of the Buddha-nature, the tathagatagarbha, is like sky.
It cannot be influenced by temporary phenomena such as clouds. Temporary
defilements will not stain, defile or influence this Buddha-nature.
64
ལས་དང་ཉོན་
ན་མོངས་ཆུ་སོགས་ཀྱིས། །
འདི་ནི་མངོན་པར་འགྲུབ་མིན་ཏེ། །
འཆི་དང་ན་དང་རྒ་བའི་མེ། །
མི་བཟད་པས་ཀྱང་འཚིག་མི་འགྱུར། 1
it is not produced by the waters of karma, defilements and so forth nor will it be burnt
by the cruel fires of ageing, sickness and death.
It is not brought into existence by the water of karma, of the poisons and so on. Hence
it is also not consumed by the cruel fires of dying, falling sick and aging.
Buddha-nature is not
created by karma and
emotions, nor destroyed
by sickness, old age and
death
Karma and emotions that are like the water element cannot produce a new
Buddha-nature. Basically, all the various kinds of aggregates, dhatus, ayatanas
and emotions cannot produce Buddha-nature. Likewise, conditions such as
death, old age and sickness cannot burn the Buddha-nature or make it cease to
exist.
65
དུས་མཐའ་དམྱལ་བ་ཐ་མལ་པའི། །
མེ་གསུམ་འཆི་དང་ན་བ་དང་། །
རྒ་བའི་མེ་གསུམ་རིམ་བཞིན་དུ། །
དེ་དག་འདྲ་བར་ཤེས་པར་བྱ། །
One should know that the fires three - of death, sickness and age - are similar
respectively to the fires which blaze at the end of time, in the hells and ordinarily.
The three fires of death, sickness and aging are to be understood in their given
sequence as resembling the fire at the end of time, the fire of hell and an ordinary fire.
The three kinds of fire
(sickness, old age and
death) cannot burn
Buddha-nature
There are three different kinds of fire that can burn things. There is the fire of
the end of time, the fire of hell and ordinary fire. These are actually death,
sickness and old age. None of these can burn the Buddha-nature. I recall
Krishna saying something like this to Arjuna! We have to be careful here, I think!
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
59



66
སྐྱེ་འཆི་ན་དང་རྒ་བ་ལས་གྲོལ་བ། །
འདི་ཡི་རང་བཞིན་ཇི་བཞིན་ཉིད་རྟོགས་ཏེ། །
སྐྱེ་སོགས་ཕོངས་དང་བྲལ་ཡང་དེ་ཡི་རྒྱུས། །
བློ་ལྡན་འགྲོ་ལ་སྙིང་རྗེ་བསྐྱེད་ཕྱིར་བསྙེན། །
Free from birth, ageing, sickness and death, they have realized the true nature, just as it
is. On account of this the wise have awakened compassion for beings, and even
though free from the miseries of birth and so on they demonstrate these.
Having realized thatness, the nature of the (Dharmadhatu), just as it is, those of
understanding are released from birth, sickness aging and death. Through free from the
destitution of birth and so on, they demonstrate these, since by their insight) they have
given rise to compassion for beings.
The Bodhisattva has freed
himself from samsara by
practising and realising
the Buddha-nature, but
he still manifests birth
and death in order to
benefit sentient beings
In order to end this endless cycle of birth, old age, sickness and death - basically,
going round in samsara - a Bodhisattva on the path will aspire to practice and
realise the Buddha-nature that is beyond birth, sickness, old age and death.
With this kind of aspiration, the Bodhisattva gradually frees himself from karma,
emotions, birth and all these samsaric problems. But with great compassion for
sentient beings who haven't understood Buddha-nature, Bodhisattvas will still
manifest being born, dwelling, old age, death and so on.
67
འཕགས་པས་འཆི་དང་ན་བ་དང་
། །
རྒ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྩད་ནས་སྤངས། །
ལས་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་དབང་གིས་སྐྱེ། །
དེ་ལ་དེ་མེད་ཕྱིར་དེ་མེད།
The sufferings of ageing, sickness and death - these the deeply-realized have radically
removed. They are without them because their birth is not brought about by karma and
the defiled.
The noble have eradicated the suffering of dying, falling ill and aging at its root, which is
being born due to karma and poisons. There being no such cause], there is no such
{fruit
As they have actualised
the Dharmadhatu,
Bodhisattvas no longer
have karma and emotion,
so they are free from birth
and death
Because sublime beings, Bodhisattvas, have actualised the Dharmadhatu or
Buddha-nature, they have abandoned death, sickness, old age and all kinds of
suffering. This is because Bodhisattvas don't have karma and emotion, meaning
that they aren't under the power of karma and emotion. Therefore Bodhisattvas
are free from birth, sickness, old age and death.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
60



ཇི་བཞིན་ཡང་དག་མཐོང་བའི་ཕྱིར། !
སྐྱེ་སོགས་རྣམས་ལས་འ
སྣ་འདས་གྱུར་ཀྱང་། །
སྙིང་རྗེའི་བདག་ཉིད་སྐྱེ་བ་དང་། །
འཆི་དང་རྒ་དང་ན་བར་སྟོན། །
Since they have seen the truth, just as it is, their compassionate nature shows birth,
ageing, sickness and death even though they have transcended birth and the rest.
Since they have seen reality as it is, they are beyond being born and so on. Yet, as the
embodiment of compassion itself they display birth, illness, old age and death.
Bodhisattvas still manifest
birth and death, but
through compassion,
rather than the power of
karma and emotion
But we still see the birth and death of Bodhisattvas, and all kinds of seemingly
ordinary appearances. This is because of their compassion. They are under the
power of compassion, not under the power of emotion and karma. Even though
Bodhisattvas are beyond birth and death, by the power of their compassion they
will manifest being born and going through sickness, old age and death.
69
རྒྱལ་སྲས་འགྱུར་མེད་ཆོས་ཉིད་འདི། 1
རྟོགས་ནས་མ་རིག་ལྗོངས་རྣམས་ཀྱིས། །
སྐྱེ་བ་
སྐྱེ་བ་ལ་སོགས་དག་ཏུ་ནི། །
མཐོང་བ་གང་ཡིན་དེ་རྨད་དོ། །
Those by ignorance blinded see the sons of the victors - the ones who have realized
this changeless true nature - as having birth and so on. This is indeed a wonder!
After the heirs of the Victorious One have realized this changeless state, those who are
blinded by ignorance see them as being born and so forth. That such seeing should
occur is truly wonderful and amazing.
The Bodhisattvas have
transcended birth and
death, yet still manifest
these out of compassion.
This is extraordinary!
Maitreya is saying that this is an extraordinary quality of the Bodhisattvas. They
have realised the unchanging nature of the Buddha, and therefore they have
transcended all the suffering of death and birth. But for the sake of those who
are ignorant, and who have not understood this Buddha-nature, they still
manifest birth and death and so on, which is something extraordinary.
Day 5
Introduction
Although the stanzas we'll cover today are actually very difficult to understand, at
a glance they're more comprehensible. So I'll go quickly and cover several
stanzas, and then try to spend more time on questions and answers. And if we
have time, perhaps I can extract some of Mipham Rinpoche's explanations of
Buddha-nature from the tongtun sengey naro, the "Lion's Roar".
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
61



70
འཕགས་པའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་ཐོབ་པ་གང་
། 1
བྱིས་པའི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་དུ་སྟོན་ཏེ། །
དེ་ཉིད་ཕྱིར་ན་འགྲོ་བ་ཡི།
གཉེན་གྱི་ཐབས་དང་སྙིང་རྗེ་མཆོག །
Those who have reached the domain of realization appear within the immature's field
of experience. Therefore the skills and compassion of these friends for beings are truly
excellent.
When they have attained the field of experience of the noble, they show themselves as
the field of experience of the children. Hence means and compassion of the friends of
beings are supreme.
Because sublime beings
manifest, we consider
them the most
compassionate and
virtuous friends, and the
best method
Although sublime beings have obtained the sublime state, they nevertheless
manifest as ordinary beings. Here 'sublime beings' refers to the Bodhisattvas,
and it can also refer to the Buddha. Because they manifest, this alone is a good
reason why we consider them as the most compassionate and virtuous friends,
and also as the best method.
Form is emptiness, but
emptiness is form - there
is still unobstructed
cognition
Bodhisattvas have not
evaporated like moisture.
They have transcended.
Bodhisattvas have
transcended ordinary
tongue and even the
Buddha's special tongue.
All form is emptiness
Again, let's go back to draldrey, the result of elimination. Form is emptiness,
emptiness is form - this is what we are talking about here. When we say form is
emptiness, of course everything is fabrication, and these fabricated phenomena
do not exist in reality in the way that they appear. But unobstructed cognition is
still there. It's not like the evaporation of moisture. The sublime being has
reached a higher level, or perhaps it would be better to say he has transcended.
Here we are talking about the word 'Arya' in Sanskrit (pakpa in Tibetan), which we
translate as 'sublime'. So when we say Buddha transcends tongue, he transcends
our ordinary kind of tongue. He even transcends the special type of tongue that
is one of the 32 major marks, because all form is emptiness. In the Diamond
Sutra he himself said, "those who see me as a form, they have not seen me. They
have a wrong view". But when we talk about a form Buddha, then we prefer a
Buddha with a tongue rather than a Buddha without a tongue! This alone
demonstrates the Buddha's quality of unobstructed compassion, and shows that
he is the great virtuous friend. Sublime beings in general, and particularly
sublime beings from the second bhumi to the seventh bhumi, transcend all kinds
of worldly states. And yet sublime beings still appear as ordinary beings.
Diamond Sutra: Those
who see me as form have
a wrong view"
But we prefer a Buddha
with a tongue, so he
manifests one through his
unobstructed compassion
དེ་ནི་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཐམས་ཅད་ལས།
འདས་ཀྱང་འཇིག་རྟེན་ལས་མ་གཡོས།
འཇིག་རྟེན་དོན་དུ་འཇིག་རྟེན་ན། །
འཇིག་རྟེན་དྲི་མས་མ་གོས་སྤྱོད། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
62



Even though they have transcended everything worldly, the world they do not leave.
They act within the world for the world but unblemished by worldly impurity.
Though they are beyond all worldly matters, these {Bodhisattvas) do not leave the
world. They act for the sake of all worldly beings within the world, unblemished by its
defects.
Sublime beings have
transcended the worldly
state, yet they have not
moved beyond it. They
manifest in this world
without any worldly stain
Even though they have gone beyond the worldly state, they have not moved from
the worldly state. This term 'has not moved or deviated' (mayöpa) is so beautiful.
It's such an important term, because in a way, this is another quality of the
Buddha-nature. Because he has not moved from the worldly state, for the sake
of worldly beings a sublime being will manifest in this world without any worldly
stain.
72
ཇི་ལྟར་པདྨ་ཆུ་ནང་དུ། །
སྐྱེས་པ་ཆུ་ཡིས་གོས་པ་མེད། །
དེ་བཞིན་འདི་ནི་འཇིག་རྟེན་དུ། །
སྐྱེས་ཀྱང་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཆོས་མི་གོས། ། i
A lotus, born of water, by water is unblemished. Similarly, even though they are born
in the world, by worldly things they are unblemished.
As a lotus will grow in the midst of water, not being polluted by the water's (faults),
these 'noble ones are born in the world unpolluted by any worldly phenomena.
As the lotus is unstained
by muddy water, so
sublime beings are
unstained by emotion and
karma
Here we have an example. Even though a lotus is born in muddy water, the
muddy water does not stain it. Likewise, although these sublime beings arise in
this world, the stains of this world, such as emotion or karma, do not affect
them.
73
བྱ་བ་སྒྲུབ་ལ་རྟག་ཏུ་བློ། །
མེ་བཞིན་དུ་ནི་འབར་བ་དང་། །
ཞི་བའི་བསམ་གཏན་སྙོམས་འཇུག་ལ། །
རྟག་ཏུ་སྙོམས་པར་ཞུགས་པ་ཡིན། །
In order to accomplish their task their brilliant intelligence is like a fire blazing without
cease. They always rest evenly immersed in meditative stability upon peace.
Viewing the accomplishment of their task, their understanding ays blazes like fire.
And they always rest evenly balanced in meditative stability, which is peace.
Sublime beings engage in
action to benefit sentient
beings without any effort,
like fire burns dry wood
For sublime beings in general, and especially for those on the eighth bhumi, their
motivation to engage in action that benefits sentient beings comes without any
effort. It's like when your have lots of twigs and dry wood, then fire comes
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
63



without any effort. At the same time, the Bodhisattva is always dwelling in the
samadhi of shunyata, the extremeless.
74
སྔོན་གྱི་འཕེན་པའི་དབང་དང་ནི། ། 1
རྣམ་རྟོག་ཐམས་ཅད་བྲལ་བའི་ཕྱིར། །
དེ་ནི་ལུས་ཅན་སྨིན་པ་ཡི།
དོན་དུ་འབད་པ་བྱེད་མ་ཡིན། །
Due to previous impetus and their being ideation-free, no effort need be made to bring
beings to maturity.
By the power of their former {prayers, and since they are free from all ideation, they do
not exert any deliberate effort to lead all sentient beings to maturation.
Ninth bhumi Bodhisattvas
benefit beings by the
power of their past
aspirations. Tenth bhumi
Bodhisattvas benefit
beings without any
intention, conception or
effort
When the Bodhisattva reaches the ninth bhumi, he engages in actions to benefit
sentient beings without any effort. These Bodhisattvas benefit beings by the
power of all their aspirations in the past. And finally, when the Bodhisattva
reaches the tenth bhumi, he no longer even has the intention of helping. There
is no intention, there is no conception, and so there is absolutely no effort.
བསྟན་དང་གཟུགས་སྐུ་དག་དང་ནི། ། I
སྦྱོར་དང་སྤྱོད་ལམགྱིས་ཀྱང་རུང་། །
གང་ཞིག་ཇི་ལྟར་གང་གིས་འདུལ།
དེས་དེ་དེ་ལྟ་ཉིད་དུ་ཤེས། །
They know precisely the ways and means to train anyone and whichever teaching,
physical form, mode of conduct or action would be appropriate.
These {heirs of the Victorious Onel know precisely how and by what (method/ each
should be trained -- through whatever teachings, form kayas, conduct and ways of
behaviour are individually appropriate.
Bodhisattvas engage in
different kinds of
teachings and activity for
different kinds of beings,
from ordinary activities
like walking to special
actions like chanting
mantras or giving their
limbs to hungry tigers
Bodhisattvas such as the tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas teach all kinds of vehicles for
different kinds of disciples and beings with different kinds of aspiration or
motivation (möpa). For these different beings, Bodhisattvas will manifest in
different forms and they will engage in general actions and also specific actions
(chölam). General actions include the 'four postures', which are the seemingly
ordinary actions of walking, standing, sitting and sleeping (drowa, chak, duk and
nyal). They will engage in specific Bodhisattva actions such as chanting mantras
or giving their limbs to hungry tigers. But at the same time, they also engage in
seemingly ordinary kinds of actions such as walking, yawning, sleeping and all
that. These points are very important here, because the Buddha and
Bodhisattvas are all part of the path.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
64



Sublime beings,
particularly manifestation
Buddhas, are all part of
the path. They are there
for deluded beings
They cannot be
completely sublime, else
there would be no
communication with us,
so they need to look
somewhat ordinary and
do some ordinary things
In particular, the manifestation Buddhas like the nirmanakaya are all tools of the
path. The path is there because there are deluded beings. But because ordinary
beings are deluded, sublime beings can't be absolutely sublime. Otherwise they
would be beyond us, and there would be no communication between
Bodhisattvas and those on the path - it would be completely sublime! So they
have to be somewhat related to us, with one nose, one face and so on. This
works better. Similarly, we can relate to things like sleeping, yawning and
walking. But at the same time, they can't be too ordinary, because then what's
the point? They have to be special, with a blue colour, six arms, and things like
that. Even the 32 major marks are related to ordinary things like a tongue. But
rather than an ordinary tongue, it's slightly beyond the normal, like a tongue that
covers the whole face. Things are slightly beyond the normal. The path is
difficult, but the difficulty is not because of the path. It's because of the person
that walks on the path, and that's why it has to suit the needs of person on the
path. And at the same time it should not negate or oppose the result. So it's
difficult. And this is why sublime beings manifest to different kinds of sentient
beings according to their different wishes and necessity. They know how to do
that.
But they can't be too
ordinary, so they have a
blue colour, six arms etc.
Thus sublime beings
manifest to different
beings according to their
needs
Similarly, in the 'Treasury
of Knowledge'. Jamgön
Kongtrül talks about
thumb-sized worlds
where beings look
completely different.
They also have sublime
beings manifesting for
their needs, but we have
no idea how this looks
In the beginning of Jamgön Kongtrül's encyclopaedia, the “Treasury of
Knowledge" (sheja kunchab dző), he talks about cosmology. He explains that
there are certain planets that are only as large as our thumb. Some of these
planets are reserved only for eighth bhumi Bodhisattvas, and they have their own
master, a Buddha. It's very interesting to read these things because we have no
idea how these beings would look. We can only imagine, and our imagination is
very limited. It's like fashion designers. They never come up with anything really
new. There are usually two sleeves because we only have two hands. That's all
we can do. You can't really go further than that! Fashion has to be something to
wrap the body, and this is as far as we can go.
76
དེ་ལྟར་ནམ་མཁའི་མཐའ་ཀླས་ཀྱི། །
འགྲོ་ལ་རྟག་ཏུ་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་པར། །
ཐོགས་མེད་བློ་ལྡན་དེ་ཡིས་ནི། །
སེམས་ཅན་དོན་ནི་ཡང་དགུ་འཇུག ། |
Like this, those of unhindered intelligence excellently engage themselves in benefiting
beings as limitless as the sky, continually and spontaneously.
Always {acting spontaneously and without hindrance for sentient beings whose number
is limitless as space, such (Bodhisattvas) who possess understanding truly engage in the
task of benefiting beings.
Thus sublime beings will
benefit infinite sentient
beings spontaneously and
without obstruction
So a sublime being will benefit infinite sentient beings, as limitless as the sky,
and he will benefit them spontaneously, without any obstruction.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
65



7
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཚུལ་འདི་ནི། །
རྗེས་ཐོབ་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་རྣམས་དང་།
སེམས་ཅན་ཡང་དག་སྒྲོལ་བ་ལ། །
འཇིག་རྟེན་ན་ནི་མཉམ་པ་ཉིད། །
The way in which these Bodhisattvas act in the worlds to help beings during the post-
meditation phase is the same as the tathagata's way of truly liberating beings.
The way the Bodhisativas (unfold activity in the post-meditative phase equals the
tathagatas' {action) in the world for beings' true liberation.
Ordinary beings cannot
differentiate between the
manifestation of a tenth
bhumi Bodhisattva and a
Buddha
From the point of view of ordinary beings, it is impossible to differentiate
between the way tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas manifest and benefit sentient beings
during their post-meditation, and the way that Buddhas manifest. Ordinary
beings cannot differentiate between the Buddha's activity and the tenth bhumi
Bodhisattva's activity. They are seen as equal.
73
དེ་ལྟ་མོད་ཀྱི་ས་རྡུལ་དང་། །
རྒྱ་མཚོ་བ་གླང་རྨིག་རྗེས་ཀྱི། །
ཁྱད་པར་གང་ཡིན་སངས་རྒྱས་དང་། །
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའི་ཁྱད་དེ་ཉིད། །
Although this is true, the differences between these Bodhisattvas and the Buddhas are
like those between the earth and an atom or between an ox's hoof-print and the ocean.
Though this is true indeed, whatever difference lies between the earth and an atom or
else between the water in the sea and in an ox's hoof print, is the difference between a
Buddha and a Bodhisattva.
But in reality there is a big
difference. The tenth
bhumi Bodhisattva's
activity is like the water in
an ox's hoof-print, and
the Buddha's is like the
ocean
But in reality, there's a big difference. In reality, the extent of the tenth bhumi
Bodhisattva's activity to benefit sentient beings is equal to a piece of earth, while
the Buddha's is like infinite particles of dust. The Bodhisattva's depth of
compassion and wisdom is like the water that has collected in a cow's footprint,
whereas the Buddha's depth of compassion and wisdom is like an ocean.
7}
གཞན་འགྱུར་མིན་བདག་མི་ཟད་ཆོས་ལྡན་ཕྱིར། །
འགྲོ་སྐྱབས་ཕྱི་མའི་མཐའ་མེད་མུར་ཐུག་ཕྱིར། །
དེ་ནི་རྟག་ཏུ་གཉིས་མེད་མི་རྟོག་ཕྱིར། །
འཇིག་མེད་ཆོས་ཀྱང་མ་བྱས་རང་བཞིན་ཕྱིར། །
Because it has inexhaustible qualities, its nature is not to alter. It is the refuge of beings
because it has no limits in the future, right to the very end. It is always non-dual
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
6



because it is non-conceptual. It is also of indestructible character because, by nature, it
is uncreated.
{The dharmakayal does not change into something else, since it has inexhaustible
properties. It is the refuge of beings, since fit protects them without any limit of time,
until the final end it is always free from duality, since it is foreign to all ideation. It is
also indestructible state, since its nature is uncreated.
The dharmakaya has
obtained inexhaustible
attainment. It does not
transform, so it is the
only undeceptive object of
refuge
Now we are going back to Buddha-nature again. The Dharmadhatu or the
dharmakaya does not change. It does not transform. It does not give up its old
body, nor shed its old skin like a snake, nor does it acquire a new skin. It does
not shed because it has obtained inexhaustible attainment. When we talk about
inexhaustible, we should not think in terms of very large numbers like being a
millionaire or billionaire, because that's still exhaustible. Here we're talking
about going beyond one and many. It's a bit like the sky treasure. This
dharmakaya (chöku) is the only undeceptive object of refuge. It is the refuge
until the end or without any end, meaning endlessly.
Avoiding the consequence
that the clarity aspect of
dharmakaya is
compounded
Rupakaya, Buddha's form,
would be compounded if
you needed to accumulate
merit to obtain it
Mipham Rinpoche makes a very good remark here. You see, for some Tibetan
schools, the consequence of their view is that the clarity aspect of the
dharmakaya is a compounded phenomenon. A few days ago, there was a
question about accumulating merit and purifying defilements. There's a very
important source of doubt here. Because if you say that we accumulate merit in
order to obtain or construct, so to speak, the rupakaya, the form of the Buddha,
then there's a consequence. You are then asserting that the Buddha's form is
actually a compounded phenomenon (dujey). Whereas the Shentongpas,
especially Mipham and all these guys, are saying that even a lock of his hair is an
uncompounded phenomenon. And I don't understand why you are not shocked,
as that's saying a lot! As a Buddhist, when you hear that a lock of hair is an
uncompounded phenomenon, it should shock you at first, although afterwards it
should not shock you any more.
Therefore, Mipham
asserts that even a lock of
the Buddha's hair is
uncompounded
If it were compounded, it
would be impermanent,
and thus not an unfailing
object of refuge
We need the Uttaratantra
to establish Buddha as
uncompounded, and
therefore an unfailing
object of refuge,
something that is
essential for our path
We have been talking about the ultimate refuge, but we have never thought
about it. And Mipham Rinpoche is very right. Because if Buddha's form, such as
a lock of his hair, were a compounded phenomenon then it must be
impermanent. Of course, that's standard Buddhist logic. Then there's a
problem, because if you take refuge in this Buddha, he could be gone next time,
because he's impermanent. The person in whom you take refuge is already
gone, and his replacement doesn't even know whether you've taken refuge or
not, as he's completely new, so there's a difficulty here. So can you understand
why the Uttaratantra is necessary? It's really necessary. Also, we should really
think about things like why the Buddha is an unfailing object of refuge.
Dharmakaya is free from
extremes and
Indestructible
Dharmakaya does not grasp at dualistic phenomena, for example as being
beneficial or useless. Therefore dharmakaya is free from all these extremes, and
it is indestructible, because it is uncompounded.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
67



80
སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་ཅིང་འཆི་བ་མེད། །
གནོད་མེད་རྒ་བ་མེད་པ་སྟེ། །
དེ་ནི་རྟག་དང་བརྟན་ཕྱིར་དང་།
ཞི་བའི་ཕྱིར་དང་གཡུང་དྲུང་ཕྱིར། །
This has no birth because it is permanent, no death because it is everlasting, no harm
because it is peace and no ageing because it is unchanging.
It is not born and does not die. It suffers no harm and does not age since it is
permanent and steadfast, the state of peace and immutability.
Dharmadhatu is beyond
birth and death, as it is
permanent, a state of
peace and immutability
Space, Dharmadhatu, has no birth, no genesis, no beginning. It has no death, no
end. It has no middle, no aging. Why is that? Because it is permanent, stable,
extremeless. And because it is changeless, a state of peace and immutability
(yungdrung). The word shiwa usually means 'peaceful', but here it means
extremeless. For me, these are the same thing. When you are in an extreme,
then you are not peaceful. Here, the four extremes or eight extremes are
pacified. This is explained further.
g༔
དེ་ནི་ཡིད་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་གྱི། }
ལུས་ཀྱི་སྐྱེ་མེད་རྟག་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་འགྱུར་འཆི་འཕོ་ཡིས། །
དེ་ནི་མི་འཆི་བརྟན་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
it has no birth in a mental form because it is permanent. It has no death through
inconceivable death and transmigration, because it is everlasting.
It is not leven born in a body of mental nature, since it is permanent. Steadfast it does
not die, not leven through the death and transmigration that constitute an
inconceivable transformation.
Buddha-nature is
permanent as it is beyond
form, even mental form. It
is stable, as it continues
through death and
transmigration
Buddha-nature is of course not form, not a substantial form. But it is not even a
mental form, which is why it does not have arising. Therefore it is unchanging
and permanent. And it is beyond the comprehension of our ordinary mind.
Therefore, even death and transmigration will not make Buddha-nature cease to
exist. And that is stability.
32
བག་ཆགས་ཕྲ་མོའི་ནད་རྣམས་ཀྱིས། །
གནོད་མེད་ཞི་བ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཕྱིར། །
ཟག་མེད་མངོན་པར་འདུ་བྱེད་ཀྱིས། །
གཡུང་དྲུང་ཕྱིར་ན་རྒ་བ་མེད། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
68



It is unharmed by the disease of the finer karmic imprints because it is peace. It has no
ageing produced by untainted karma because it is immutable.
Since it is peace, it does not leven suffer harm from illnesses caused by subtle karmic
imprints. Since it is immutable, there is not leven) aging induced by compositional
factors free from stain.
Buddha-nature is
peaceful. It is free from
extremes as it is not
interfered with by karma.
It is immutable as it
cannot be changed or
improved even by positive
actions
And even very small habitual patterns will not interfere with this Buddha-nature.
Therefore Buddha-nature is free from all extremes. And Buddha-nature will not
change. It cannot be dismantled even by unstained actions such as Dharma
practice, samadhi and meditation. Here we are saying that you cannot improve
the Buddha-nature, because if you improve something, then you are dismantling
or changing it. Because Buddha-nature cannot be improved, it's immutable.
And this is why it is not subject to old age or decay.
83
དེ་ལ་ཚིག་གཉིས་དེ་བཞིན་གཉིས། །
གཉིས་དང་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་གོ་རིམས་བཞིན། །
འདུས་མ་བྱས་པའི་དབྱིངས་ལ་ནི། །
རྟག་པ་ལ་སོགས་དོན་ཤེས་བྱ། །
This uncreated space has the attributes of permanence and so forth which should be
known respectively through the first pair of verses and likewise the next pair and the
next pair and the last.
Combining) sentences from the foregoing two by two, the uncreated expanse should be
known as possessing in the same sequence the attributes of being permanent and so
forth.
Stanzas 81 and 82 thus
explain the four points
introduced in stanza 80:
permanence, stability,
peace, immutability
This stanza confirms what we talked about earlier. The first two lines of stanza
81 said that Buddha-nature does not even have a mental form, and therefore it
does not have arising. This is because Buddha-nature is permanent. And the
next two lines say that Buddha-nature is beyond our conception, therefore death
will not make the Buddha-nature non-existent. That's like a proof that Buddha-
nature is stable. Each pair of lines corresponds to one of the four points that we
talked about in stanza 80, namely permanence, stability, peace or
extremelessness, and immutability. This is explained again.
84
མི་ཟད་ཡོན་ཏན་དང་ལྡན་ཕྱིར། །
གཞན་འགྱུར་མིན་བདག་རྟག་པའི་དོན། །
མཐའ་ཡི་མུ་དང་མཚུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། !
སྐྱབས་ཀྱི་བདག་ཉིད་བརྟན་པའི་དོན་ །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
69



84 (contd.)
རྣམ་པར་མི་རྟོག་རང་བཞིན་ཕྱིར། །
གཉིས་མེད་ཆོས་ཉིད་ཞི་བའི་དོན། །
མ་བཅོས་ཡོན་ཏན་ཉིད་ཕྱིར་ན། །
འཇིག་མེད་དོན་ནི་གཡུང་དྲུང་ཉིད། །
Being endowed with inexhaustible qualities it has the attribute of permanence, the
quality of not altering. Because it equals the furthest end its attribute is everlastingness,
the nature of a refuge. Because its very character is not to conceptualize, it has the
attribute of peace; the non-dual true nature. As its qualities are not things fabricated, its
attribute is immutability; the changeless nature.
Since it is endowed with inexhaustible qualities, (the dharmakayal is unchangingness
itself and thus has the attribute of permanence. Equalling the uttermost end it is refuge
itself and thus holds the attributes of steadfastness. Since absence of thought is its
nature, it is Dharmala free from duality and thus has the attribute of peace. Hosting
uncreated qualities, it is immutability itself and thus {possesses the attribute of
indestructibility.
The reasons that Buddha
nature or dharmakaya is
permanent, stable,
peaceful and immutable
Why is Buddha-nature permanent, stable and so on? Because Dharmakaya has
obtained inexhaustible qualities, therefore it does not have something to achieve.
So, dharmakaya does not transform, and that is why it is permanent. And
Dharmakaya continues, so to speak, until the end of samsara. So dharmakaya is
the ultimate object of refuge, the unfailing object if refuge, and that's why
dharmakaya is stable. Dharmakaya does not fall into the two extremes of non-
existence and existence, so dharmakaya is free from samsara and nirvana, and
this is extremelessness. And dharmakaya possesses an unfabricated,
uncompounded quality, so dharmakaya is inexhaustible, and that's immutability.
#10: Inseparable
84 (contd.)
གང་ཕྱིར་དེ་ནི་ཆོས་སྐ་རེ་ནི་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས། །
དེ་ནི་འཕགས་པའི་བདེན་པ་དོན་དམ་མྱ་ངན་འདས། །
དེ་ཕྱིར་ཉི་དང་ཟེར་བཞིན་ཡོན་ཏན་དབྱེར་མེད་པས། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད་ལས་མ་གཏོགས་མྱ་ངན་འདས་པ་མེད། །
It is the dharmakaya. It is the fathagata. It is the highest truth. It is the ultimately-true
nirvana. Like the sun and its rays, these aspects are inseparable: so there is no nirvana
apart from the Buddhahood itself.
Why is it the dharmakaya, the tathagata, the noble truth and the absolute nirvana? its
qualities are inseparable, like the sun and its rays. Thus other than Buddhahood there is
no nirvana.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
70



#10: Inseparable
An emptiness practitioner
practices the emptiness
path, goes through the
emptiness bhumis and
achieves emptiness
It's almost like this. An emptiness practitioner practices the emptiness path,
goes through the emptiness bhumis and achieves emptiness. That's it! What I'm
saying is that if a follower of Madhyamika were to translate the Uttaratantra
teachings, they might say something like that. This is a wonderful stanza. This
Buddha-nature is the dharmakaya. It is the tathagata, it is enlightenment, and it
is the sublime or ultimate truth. And it is also the actual enlightenment. So all
these terms are synonymous. They are all are different names or different ways
of saying the same thing. Like the sun and its rays, they are one, but with
different aspects. So there is no nirvana apart from Buddha-nature. Again this
will be explained extensively.
Buddha-nature, ultimate
truth, the dharmakaya
and the tathagata are all
synonymous. Like the
sun and its rays, they are
one but with different
aspects
85
མདོར་ན་ཟག་མེད་དབྱིངས་ལ་ནི། །
དོན་གྱི་རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ་བཞིས། །
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཡི། །
རྣམ་གྲངས་བཞིར་ནི་རིག་པར་བྱ། 1
In brief, since the meaning of this untainted space is divided into four aspects,
dharmakaya etc., should be known as four synonyms for it.
Since the unpolluted expanse has, put briefly, four different types of meaning, it should
be known in terms of four synonyms: the dharmakaya and so forth.
The ying, the unstained
space, is divided into four
categories
This will be explained extensively, but first there is a summary. This ying, the
unstained space is divided into four categories, such as dharmakaya, which will
now be explained.
86
སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་དབྱེར་མེད་པ་དང་། །
དེ་རིགས་དེ་བཞིན་ཐོབ་པ་དང་། །
བསྟུན་མེད་བསླུ་མེད་ཆོས་ཉིད་དང་། །
གདོད་ནས་རང་བཞིན་ཞི་ཉིད་དོ། །
That inseparable from the Buddha qualities, the achievement of the potential, just as it
is, the true nature, neither false nor unreliable and that having, from the very beginning,
the very nature of peace itself.
Buddha qualities are indivisible. The disposition is attained as it is. The true state is
falways} free from any fickleness and deceit. Since beginningless time the nature has
been peace itself.
Buddha-nature is referred
to with four different
names:
1. Dharmakaya - to refer
to the enlightened
qualities inseparable from
Buddha-nature
(1) Dharmakaya: The qualities of the Buddha such as the ten powers have never
been separated from Buddha-nature even for a single moment. And because
of that, at times we refer to Buddha-nature as dharmakaya.
(2) Tathagata: And at times during the path, when the qualities of the Buddha
such as the ten powers are revealed as if they are something newly obtained
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
71



2. Tathagata - to refer to
the qualities revealed
upon enlightenment
3. Ultimate truth - to refer
to the quality unstained
by dualistic distinctions
(even though they have always been there), then we call Buddha-nature
'tathagata' (deshin shekpa), where gata means something like 'going, gone
and reached'. We are looking at the same thing, the same Buddha-nature,
but now we are giving it a different name. We are calling it Buddhahood,
enlightenment. It is like when the clouds go away, we say the sun is coming
out. But the sun is there already.
(3) Ultimate truth: The quality of the Buddha-nature is never failing. It's a truth
that is never false. It is never stained by the fault of dualistic distinctions.
And because there is no dualism, there is no change. Again, this is the same
Buddha-nature, but at times we refer to this aspect as the sublime truth or
the ultimate truth. People like Nagarjuna do this.
(4) Absolute nirvana: Right from the beginning this Buddha-nature is
primordially pure from all kinds of seemingly present but actually temporary
defilements, and that is the absolute nirvana.
4. Absolute nirvana - to
refer to it as primordially
pure from defilements
that are seemingly
present but only
temporary in reality
Dharmakaya is like the
clean window we aspire
for. It's not the cleaning.
but the non-existence of
the dirt
Points (2) and (4) both
refer to enlightenment:
Let's go back once again to my strange example of the window-glass. What's
the non-existence of dirt? That's automatically the clean glass, isn't it? And that
aspect is what we call dharmakaya. We say that actually it's clean, but it's
stained at the moment. We even think like that! We think, "Actually it's clean, so
let me clean it". We are longing for the result that is clean, and this aspect is
called dharmakaya. It's not the cleaning, but this non-existence of the dirt that
is called dharmakaya. You may have noticed that two out of these four points -
the second and the fourth points - both refer to enlightenment. But they are two
different kinds of enlightenment. The second point is like the clean glass that
you obtain after you have washed it, that kind of enlightenment. Many
practitioners aspire for this kind of enlightenment, and that's already very good.
But it's what we call 'approximate enlightenment'. By contrast, the glass that is
pre-dirty and pre-clean is never changing, and that is the sublime truth, which is
at times also referred to as the ultimate enlightenment'.
(2) is like the clean glass
you obtain after washing.
called approximate
enlightenment
(4) is like the glass that is
pre-dirty and pre-clean,
ultimate enlightenment
87
རྣམ་ཀུན་མངོན་རྫོགས་བྱང་ཆུབ་དང་། །
དྲི་མ་བག་ཆགས་བཅས་སྤངས་པ།
སངས་རྒྱས་མྱ་ངན་འདས་པ་ནི། །
དམ་པའི་དོན་དུ་གཉིས་མེད་ཉིད། །
Buddhahood is every aspect of true and perfect enlightenment. Nirvana is total
removal of impurities, along with their latencies. In the true sense, these are not
different
Direct perfect enlightenment (with regard to all aspects, and abandonment of the stains
along with their imprints fare called) Buddha and nirvana respectively. In truth, these
are not two different things.
When we explain the meaning of non-duality or the Buddha, then we are
referring to a mind, a cognizer or a wisdom that understands everything
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
72



The words Buddha and
nirvana are synonymous.
Buddha refers to a mind
or wisdom that is
omniscient, and nirvana
refers to the purification
of all temporary
defilements. But in
reality, Buddha and
nirvana are no different
everything as it is and everything as it appears. We refer to this kind of
omniscience as 'enlightenment' (changchub). When all the temporary defilements
are purified, we also refer to this as 'nirvana' (nya ngendey). So the absolute
realisation is referred to as Buddha, and the absolute purification is referred to as
nirvana, but in reality they're exactly the same. They're no different.
88
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་གྲངས་མེད་པ། །
བསམ་མེད་དྲི་མེད་ཡོན་ཏན་དང་
། །
དབྱེར་མེད་མཚན་ཉིད་ཐར་པ་སྟེ།
ཐར་པ་གང་དེ་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས། །
Liberation's characteristic is to be inseparable from its qualities - complete, numberless,
inconceivable and stainless as they are. Such liberation as this is the tathagata.
Uberation is distinguished by indivisibility from qualities present in all their aspects:
innumerable, inconceivable and unpolluted. Such liberation is also called “tathagata."
Liberation is when all
qualities are completed
and all defilements are
purified, explained with
the analogy of the
painters
Now, what is nirvana? What is liberation? It is when all the Buddha qualities are
completed, when all the qualities cannot be measured or contemplated. And it is
when all the defilements are purified, and therefore it possesses the quality of
stainlessness. We refer to this kind of non-duality as liberation. This is going to
be explained extensively, with an analogy.
.
88 (contd.}
ཇི་ལྟར་རི་མོ་འདྲི་བྱེད་པ། །
གཞན་དང་བ་ཞན་ལ་མཁས་པ་དག །
གང་ཞིག་ཡན་ལག་གང་ཤེས་པ། །
དེ་གཞན་ངེས་ཟིན་མེད་པར་འགྱུར། །
Compare this to artists specialized in drawing one part to another, yet whichever part
one knew the others had not mastered.
Suppose some painters mastered their craft, each with respect to a different part of the
body), so that whichever part one would know how to do, he would not success with
any other part .
4}
དེ་ནས་འདི་ལ་ཁྱེད་ཀུན་གྱིས། །
ང་ཡི་གཟུགས་ནི་གྱིས་ཤིག་ཅེས། །
མངའ་བདག་རྒྱལ་པོས་དེ་དག་ལ། །
བཀའ་ཡིག་རས་ནི་བྱིན་བ་དང༌། །
Their king and ruler gives them a canvas, with the order, "all of you must now away
and paint my picture!"
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
73



Then the king, the ruler of the country, hands them a canvas and gives the order: "You
all together paint my image on this!"
4)
དེ་ལས་དེ་ནི་ཐོས་གྱུར་ཏེ། །
རི་མོའི་ལས་ལ་རབ་
དེ་ལ་མངོན་པར་སྦྱོར་རྣམས་ལ།
༣
གཅིག་གཅིག་ཡུལ་གཞན་སོང་གྱུར་པ། །
བ་སྦྱོར་རོ།
Having this received they commence its painting as best as they can but one of them
departs to some far and foreign land.
Having heard this forder] from the king) they carefully take up their painting work.
While they are well immersed in their task, one among them leaves for another country.
9
དེ་ནི་ཡུལ་གཞན་སོང་བས་ན། །
དེ་མ་ཚང་ཕྱིར་རི་མོ་དེ། །
ཡན་ལག་ཐམས་ཅད་ཡོངས་རྫོགས་པར། །
མི་འགྱུར་བཞིན་ཤེས་དཔེར་བྱས་སོ། །
Since this man was missing, through going to another place, the portrait in all its parts
could not be finished. Thus is an example made.
Since they are incomplete due to this travel abroad, their painting in all its parts does
not get fully perfected. Thus the example is given.
The analogy - a king
wants a portrait painted
by several painters, each
of whom specialises in
one part of the body. So
if any painter is absent,
the portrait cannot be
completed
Now, let's imagine that a king wishes to have his portrait painted, and there are
several painters each of whom can paint a different part of his body. Some can
paint the eyes, some can paint the nose, and they are only good at their own
particular aspect. The one who's good at painting the ears doesn't know how to
paint the rest. And the king commands them to paint his form, gives them
canvas, and they start to paint. If one of them has to go to another country, then
the painting will not be completed. This is the example, which comes from a
sutra requested by a naga. Now we will hear the actual meaning.
92
དེ་རྣམས་འདྲི་བྱེད་གང་ཡིན་པ། །
སྦྱིན་དང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་བཟོད་ལ་སོགས། །
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་གྱི་མཆོག་ལྡན་པའི།
སྟོང་བ་ཉིད་ནི་གཟུགས་སུ་བརྗོད། །
The "artists" are generosity, skilful conduct, patience et cetera. Voidness, endowed
with every finest aspect, is said to be like the royal picture.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
74



Who are the painters of these {parts of the image)? They are generosity, morality,
patience and so on. Emptiness endowed with all the supreme aspects is described as
being the form of the king).
Similarly, the dharmakaya
cannot be completed if
any of the six paramitas is
absent, so accumulation
and purification need to
be completed to establish
the dharmakaya
The painters are generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, meditation and
wisdom. When they are all present, with nobody missing, then the form of the
dharmakaya can be completed. If one of them is missing, then the form of the
dharmakaya cannot be completed. This is why qualities such as accumulation
and purification, emptiness and clarity all have to be completed in order to
establish the dharmakaya.
93
ཤེས་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྣམ་གྲོལ་རྣམས། ། !
གསལ་དང་འཕྲོ་དང་དག་ཕྱིར་དང་། །
ཐ་དད་མེད་ཕྱིར་འོད་དང་ཟེར། །
ཉི་མའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་རྣམས་དང་མཚུངས། །
Prajña, jñana and perfect freedom are like the sun's light, beams and orb, because they
are respectively bright, radiant and pure, and since they are inseparable.
Illuminating, radiating and purifying, and inseparable from each other, analytical
wisdom, primordial wisdom and total liberation correspond to the light, rays and orb of
the sun.
When the two wisdoms
are free from defilements,
this is called clarity,
radiance and purity.
These are one with three
aspects, like the sun, its
light and its radiance
When the two wisdoms - the wisdom that understands how it is and the wisdom
that understands whatever there is - are free from defilements, this is called
clarity, radiance and purity. Clarity, radiance and purity are one, but with three
different aspects or qualities. It is like the sun, its light and its radiance. These
cannot be separated.
94
དེས་ན་སངས་རྒྱས་མ་ཐོབ་པར། །
མྱ་ངན་འདས་པ་མི་ཐོབ་སྟེ། །
འོད་དང་འོད་ཟེར་སྤངས་ནས་ནི། །
ཉི་མ་ལྟ་བར་མི་ནུས་བཞིན། །
Therefore until the achievement of Buddhahood nirvana is never achieved, just as
without sunlight and sun rays the sun could never be seen.
One will therefore not attain nirvana without attaining the state of Buddhahood. Just as
one could not see the sun iſ one were to eliminate its light and its rays.
This is why we need to
achieve Buddhahood or
approximate
enlightenment in order to
achieve nirvana
This is why if you haven't achieved Buddhahood, the second kind of approximate
enlightenment that we talked about before, then you will not achieve nirvana, the
fourth kind of enlightenment. This is also an answer to the question that was
raised about purification and accumulation. If you haven't accomplished the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
75



Purification and
realisation come together,
like the sun and its light
and radiance
actions of purification then you will not accomplish the action of realisation. Just
as you cannot see the sun if you get rid of its light and its radiance, purification
and realisation have to come together.
Day 6
Introduction
Our primary motivation
when studying the
Uttaratantra should be to
benefit all sentient beings
I would like to remind you that when we study the profound Mahayana shastras
like the Uttaratantra, we must do so with the profound motivation of benefiting
all sentient beings. The motivation to understand and realise the meaning of the
text should be secondary. Our primary motivation should be bodhicitta, doing
this to benefit sentient beings. This subject is very difficult to understand. As
Chandrakirti said, unless one has some kind of merit, some kind of habit or
propensity (bakchak) to understand the Mahayana, it's very difficult to
understand. And we must work hard so that we will have that propensity. And
for that we need renunciation mind, and revulsion towards samsara.
This subject is difficult,
and we need to create
merit - the habit or
propensity to understand
the Mahayana
To do that, we need
renunciation mind. But
that's difficult in this
modern age, as our need
to schedule things makes
us forget about
impermanence
Our weakness is good for
businesses like insurance,
but we have no power
over the two biggest
things in our life - birth
and death
But that's difficult, especially in this modern age. We have to program and
schedule everything otherwise things do not work. But when we need to
schedule things, then we automatically forget about impermanence,
changeability and all of that. This so-called modern and advanced society has
actually made us very weak, and this weakness is very good for business! Take
insurance, for example. In certain countries, you have to have insurance to do
anything at all, and it's all based on the thought that 'if this happens then you
will be safe from the consequences', so it's all very much based on scheduling
and planning. We're basically programming our life. And yet, so far I have met
almost nobody who is completely insured! And this is because we have no
power. We just don't have any power. No one has the right, this so-called
human right. The two most important things that can happen in our life are birth
and death. And these happen because they happen. We have no power over
them. We cannot choose our mother, our father, or the date of their intercourse,
none of this! And likewise, we all know that we cannot choose when we will die.
Likewise all our thoughts
are dependent on others
We can plan, but we can't
believe our plans will
work 100%. Planning is
like samsara in a nutshell
Jamgön Kongtrül wrote
"Go along with whatever
happens in your life".
This is the highest
attitude
Likewise, every thought that we have is eventually or ultimately dependent on
something else. We can plan, but we can't believe that our plans will work 100%.
We don't have freedom. Our so-called planning and programming is really like
an image of samsara in a nutshell. As it says in the praise to Jamgön Kongtrül
Lodró Thayé Rinpoche that he wrote himself, "Go along with whatever happens in
your life". It's really the highest attitude. You cannot plan things - we never
know. Today you're in love with someone and you think that this should last,
and you hope that it will be forever, but who knows what will happen? The most
ridiculous reason such as rain falling on the tent can spoil your relationship!
It's one thing to think that we are a free society and say that we can do whatever
we like, but actually practicing that is so difficult. If people could do whatever
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
76



We like to think we live in
a free society, but if
people could do whatever
they wanted, they would
be truly free - nirvana.
But even the person who
thinks they are freest
doesn't have the guts to
practice it. We love to
plan and our plans chain
us!
they wanted to do, then they would actually be free. They would have reached
nirvana! But even the people who think they are the freest, free from all kinds of
religion, free from all kinds of political systems and so on, I don't think they are
really free. We don't have the guts to actually practice freedom because we love
planning! And once we plan, then we are chained. I'm telling you this because
just this morning I was writing my schedule for the next two years!
Our planning is the cause
of all our regret, guilt and
paranoia! And not only
do we plan, but we have
to go along with plans
that others make for us,
like movie times and
dates for the World Cup!
This planning and scheduling is the cause of regret, guilt, paranoia, everything!
And not only do we make our own plans, but we have to go along with the plans
that other people have arranged for us, like the dates of the World Cup. And this
interferes with our life! Or things like the time that a movie is showing in the
cinema in the afternoon. This also really interferes with our life! If it is showing
at four o'clock, then you have to drive there, and you have to be slightly early
because you don't want to miss the beginning, and then you have to upset
people who'd like to see you before that, because you have to tell them that
you're busy. All kinds of things!
So since we now know
we're not free, let's apply
discipline and further
restrictions (a bit like
homeopathy) and seek
real freedom. And we will
find it, because we
atready have it
So, what I am saying is that since we now know that we can't be free, we should
apply a method of discipline. If we are not free after all, we should put further
restrictions upon ourselves. It's a bit like homeopathy. And with that discipline,
we can seek real freedom. And we will find it, because as we have seen over the
last five days, we have it. We already have real freedom and all the qualities of
this freedom, such as the immeasurable ushnisha. It's not just a non-
functioning liberation, but liberation complete with all its qualities.
95
དེ་ལྟར་རྒྱལ་བའི་སྙིང་པོ་ནི། །
རྣམ་གཞག་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ་ཞེས་བརྗོད། ། !
Thus as the victor's essence been described through a tenfold presentation.
In this way the nature of the Victorious One is expressed {by} the "Tentold
Presentation."
95 (contd.)
ཉོན་མོངས་སྦུབས་ནང་གནས་པ་དེ། །
དཔེ་དག་གིས་ནི་ཤེས་པར་བྱ། 1
One should understand from the following examples its presence within the contines of
the defilements.
This (tathagatagarbhal abides within the shroud of the afflictions, as should be
understood through the following nine) examples.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
77



We have now completed
the ten aspects of the
quality of Buddha-nature
So we have seen that quality of the Buddha-nature has ten different aspects.
And now Maitreya will use a series of nine examples to explain how this Buddha-
nature dwells inside the casket, cocoon or wrapping of emotion.
Maitreya now introduces
nine examples to
illustrate how Buddha-
nature is wrapped by
defilements
This topic of Buddha-nature is so important, especially for Mahayana Buddhists,
and I can't think of any other shastras that talk about Buddha-nature as
extensively as this. There are many texts that explain emptiness, the other
aspect of Buddha-nature, but not many that explain the clarity aspect. And
because it's such an important point, Maitreya will give us nine examples, and
each will be repeated. First there is a summary, then each example is explained
three times in increasing detail.
The Nine Examples (of essence and defilements)
96
སངས་རྒྱས་པད་ངན་སྦྲང་རྩི་སྦྲང་མ་ལ། 1
སྐྲུན་ལ་སྙིང་པོ་མི་གཙང་ནང་ན་གསེར།
ས་ལ་གཏེར་དང་མྱུ་ག་སོགས་འབྲས་ཆུང་དང་
། །
གོས་ཧྲུལ་ནང་ན་རྒྱལ་བའི་སྐུ་དང་ནི། །
Similar to a Buddha in a decaying lotus, honey amidst bees, grains in their husks, gold
in filth, a treasure in the ground, shoots and so on piercing through fruits, a Buddha-
statue inside tattered rags,
just like a Buddha in a decaying lotus, honey amidst bees, a grain in its husk, gold in
filth, a treasure underground, a shoot and so on sprouting from a little fruit, a statue of
the Victorious One in a lattered rag,
97
བུད་མེད་ངན་མའི་ལྟོ་ན་མི་བདག་དང་
།
ས་ལ་རིན་ཆེན་གཟུགས་ཡོད་ཇི་ལྟ་བར། 1
གློ་བུར་ཉོན་མོངས་དྲི་མས་བསྒྲིབས་པ་ཡི། །
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་ལ་དེ་བཞིན་ཁམས་འདི་གནས།
1
a monarch in a poor and ugly woman's womb or a precious image inside some clay,
this nature is within all beings present but obscured by the impurity of passing
defilement.
a ruler of mankind in a destitute woman's womb, and a precious image under ſa layer
of clay, this {Buddha) element abides within all sentient beings, obscured by the
defilement of the adventitious poisons.
First there is a summary of the nine examples:
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
78



The nine examples:
1. Buddha inside a lotus
2. Honey amidst bees
3. Fruit in its husk
4. Gold lying in dirt
5. Jewels under a house
6. Tree shoot within fruit
7. Statue wrapped in cloth
8. Chakravartin in the
womb
9. Gold statue in a mould
(1) The sublime being's body, the Buddha's body, in an ordinary entity such as
lotus.
(2) Honey surrounded by many bees.
(3) A fruit or grain within its husk.
(4) Gold in the middle of dirt or garbage.
(5) A treasure of jewels underneath a poor person's house.
(6) The potential of a big tree with branches, fruit and flowers inside a small
fruit.
(7) A statue of the Buddha wrapped in ragged cloth.
(8) A universal monarch inside an ordinary woman's womb.
(9) A gold statue inside a mould made of ordinary earth and clay.
Likewise, kham is within
sentient beings but
wrapped by defilements
Likewise, the kham or Buddha-nature is within sentient beings who are wrapped
by temporary defilements or obscurations.
98
སྡུག་བསྔལ་འབར་བས་
དྲི་མ་པདྨ་སྲོག་ཆགས་སྐྲུན་
ན་པ་མི་གཙང་ས་འབྲས་གོས་ཧྲུལ་དང་། །
པ་མངོན་པར་གདུངས་བའི་བུད་མེད་ས་ཡི་ཁམས་དང་མཚུངས། ། !
སངས་རྒྱས་སྦྲང་རྩི་སྙིང་པོ་གསེར་དང་གཏེར་དང་ནྱ་གྲོ་རིན་ཆེན་སྐུ། ། 1
གླིང་བདག་མཆོག་དང་རིན་ཆེན་གཟུགས་དང་དྲི་མེད་ཁམས་མཆོག་མཚུངས་པ་ཉིད། ། I
The impurities correspond to the lotus, the insects, the husks, filth, the ground, the fruit,
the tattered rags, the woman strongly afflicted by burning sorrows and the clay. The
Buddha, the honey, the grains, the gold, the treasure, the nyagrodha tree, the precious
statue, the supreme ruler of the continents and the precious image correspond to this
supreme, immaculate nature.
The defilements correspond to the lotus, the insects, the husk, the filth, the earth, the
fruit, the fattered rag, the pregnant woman direly vexed with burning suffering and the
clay. The Buddha, the honey, the grain, the gold, the treasure, the nyagrodha tree, the
precious statue, the continents' supreme ruler and the precious image are similar to the
supreme undefiled element.
In the examples, the
'wrapper' corresponds to
the defilements, and what
is 'wrapped' corresponds
to kham, the Buddha-
nature
In the examples, the obscurations correspond to the lotus, bees, husk, garbage,
ground, fruit, the ragged cloth, the woman stained by all kinds of suffering, and
the clay. The kham is wrapped, and this list tells us the wrapper or wrapping in
each of the analogies. The thing that is being wrapped, the kham, is like the
Buddha, honey, fruit, gold, treasure, tree, the precious statue, the universal
monarch and precious statue. These correspond to Buddha-nature in the
analogies. Now the first example is explained.
Example #1: The Buddha and the Lotus
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
79



9
ཇི་ལྟར་མདོག་ངན་པད་མའི་ཁོང་གནས་པ།
མཚན་སྟོང་གིས་འབར་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ནི། །
དྲི་མེད་ལྷ་ཡི་མིག་ལྡན་མིས་མཐོང་ནས། །
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་འདབ་མའི་སྦུབས་ནས་འབྱིན་བྱེད་པ། །
Someone endowed with pure vision, upon seeing the tathagata shining with a thousand
marks adorned within a decaying lotus, would remove him from the prison of those
petals of that "flower of water born".
Seeing that in the calyx of an ugly-coloured lotus a tathagata dwells ablaze with a
thousand marks, a man endowed with immaculate divine vision takes it from the shroud
of the water born's petals.
#1: A person with divine
eye perceives a Buddha in
a lotus and takes it out
In this example, when someone with a divine eye perceives the Buddha dwelling
inside an ordinary lotus, they will try to peel off the petals of this ordinary lotus.
That is the example, and now we come to the meaning.
1 0f]
དེ་བཞིན་བདེ་གཤེགས་མནར་མེད་གནས་རྣམས་ལའང་
།
སངས་རྒྱས་སྤྱན་གྱིས་རང་ཆོས་ཉིད་གཟིགས་ཏེ། །
སྒྲིབ་མེང་ཧཱུཾ་མཐའི་ཤུར གནས་གས་་། །
བདག་ཅག་སྒྲིབ་པ་
བ་པ་ལས་ནི་གྲོལ་བར་མཛད། ¥
Similarly the sugatas (with their Buddha eyes) see their own true nature even in those in
the worst of hells and, their nature being compassion present until the very end, they
bring freedom from all those veils.
Likewise the Sugata with his Buddha eye perceives his own true state even in those who
must abide in the hell of direct pain. Endowed with compassion itself, which is
unobscured and endures to the final end, he relieves them from their obscurations.
Likewise, the Buddha sees
that all sentient beings
have Buddha-nature, and
seeks to liberate them
Likewise, with their own self-awareness Buddhas see that even the beings that
are being burned in the hell realms have the Buddha-nature. Since the Buddha
sees this with his wisdom that is none other than compassion, he then liberates
beings like us who are chained by obscurations. He unpeels the skin of
defilements with his compassion. Now we have the example and the meaning
together.
01
ཇི་ལྟར་མི་སྡུག་པདྨ་ཟུམ་ལ་བདེ་བར་གཤེགས་པ་ནི། །
དེ་ཡི་ཁོང་གནས་ལྷ་མིག་མཐོང་ནས་འདབ་མ་གཅོད་བྱེད་ལྟར། །
ཆགས་སྡང་སོགས་དྲི་སྦུབས་བསྒྲིབས་རྫོགས་སངས་སྙིང་པོ་འགྲོ་གཟིགས་ཏེ། །
ཐུགས་རྗེས་ཐུབ་པ་དེ་བཞིན་སྒྲིབ་པ་དེ་ནི་འཇོམས་པར་མཛད། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
30



Once the sugata inside the closed decaying lotus had been seen by someone with
divine vision, the petals were sliced asunder. Likewise, when the Buddhas see the
presence of perfect Buddhahood, in beings but obscured by an impure shell of desire,
hatred and so on, through their compassion those victors destroy such obscuration.
Once his divine eye sees the Sugata abiding within the closed ugly lotus, the man cuts
the petals. Seeing the perfect Buddha-nature within beings, obscured by the shroud of
desire, hatred and the other mental poisons, the Muni does likewise and through his
compassion defeats all their veils.
With compassion, Buddha
destroys defilements just
like the person with divine
eye unpeels the lotus
Someone with a divine eye unpeels the petals of an ordinary lotus that is
wrapping the form of the Buddha. Likewise with his compassion and wisdom,
the Buddha sees Buddha-nature wrapped within the defilements of ordinary
sentient beings. And with compassion, the Buddha destroys these defilements.
Now we come to the second example.
Example #2: The Honey and the Bees
102
ཇི་ལྟར་སྲོག་ཆགས་ཚོགས་བསྐོར་སྤྲང་རྩི་ནི། །
སྐྱེས་བུ་མཁསཔས་དེ་དོན་གཉེར་བ་ཡིས། །
མཐོང་ནས་ཐབས་ཀྱིས་དེ་དང་སྲོག་ཆགས་ཚོགས། །
ཀུན་ནས་བྲལ་བར་རབ་
ཏུ་བྱེད་པ་བཞིན། 1
A clever man trying to get honey amidst swarms of insects would, having spotted it,
employ skilful means to separate that honey from the host of bees and then actually
obtain it.
Honey is surrounded by a swarm of insects. A skilful man in search of honey
employs), upon seeing this, suitable means to fully separate it from the host of bees.
#2: Honey surrounded by
bees. To obtain honey, a
person uses smoke to
clear away the bees
First the example, which is honey that is surrounded by thousands of bees. A
wise person who wishes to have this honey will use all kinds of methods such as
creating smoke to remove the bees in order to reveal the honey.
103
དྲང་སྲོང་ཆེན་པོས་ཀུན་མཁྱེན་སྤྱན་གྱིས་ནི། །
རིག་ཁམས་སྦྲང་རྩི་དང་འདྲ་དེ་གཟིགས་ནས། །
དེ་ཡི་སྒྲིབ་པ་སྦྲང་མ་དང་འདྲ་བ།
གཏན་ནས་རབ་ཏུ་སྤོང་བར་མཛད་པ་ཡིན། །
Likewise the great sages with their omniscient vision, upon seeing the honey-like causal
ground, the essence, cause total, radical relinquishment of the bee-like obscurations.
Likewise, when his eye of omniscience sees the honey-like element of awareness, the
Great Sage causes its bees-like veils to be fully and radically abandoned.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
81



Likewise, the great rishi
sees the honey-like
Buddha-nature within
beings and helps them
clear away their bee-like
obscurations
Likewise, with his infinite omniscience the great rishi, the truth-teller, sees the
Buddha-nature, which is like the honey, within all sentient beings and then helps
people to chase away the obscurations that are like the bees.
104 ཇི་ལྟར་སྦྲང་རྩི་སྲོག་ཆགས་བྱེ་བ་ཁྲག་ཁྲིག་སྟོང་བསྒྲིབས་སྦྲང་རྩི་དོན་གཉེར་མིས།
སྦྲང་མ་དེ་དག་བསལ་ཏེ་ཇི་ལྟར་འདོད་པ་བཞིན་དུ་སྦྲང་རྩིའི་བྱ་བྱེད་པ། ། ]
དེ་བཞིན་ལུས་ཅན་ལ་ཡོད་ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་ཤེས་པ་སྦྱང་མའི་རྩི་དང་འདྲ། །
ཉོན་མོངས་སྦྲང་མ་དང་འདྲ་དེ་འཇོམས་པ་ལ་མཁས་པའི་རྒྱལ་བ་སྐྱེས་བུ་བཞིན།
The man who tries to get the honey surrounded by myriads bees disperses all the
bees and procures the honey as he planned. The unlainted intelligence which is in all
beings is like the honey: the Buddhas, skilful victors over bee-like defilements, like the
nan.
Aiming to get honey that is obscured by millions and millions of honeybees, the man
disperses all these bees and procures the honey, just as he wishes. The unpolluted
knowledge present in all sentient beings is similar to the honey, and the Victor skilled in
vanquishing the bee-like poisons resembles the man.
Like the man chasing
away bees to obtain
honey, the Buddha gets
rid of sentient beings'
defitements
A person who wishes to obtain honey that is surrounded by thousands of bees
will use a method such as creating smoke to clear the bees. Thus he obtains his
aim, which is the honey. The honey is like the primordially pure Buddha-nature
dwelling in the midst of emotions that are like bees, and the Buddha who is wise
gets rid of these emotions that are like bees. Now the third example.
Example #3: The Grain and the Husk
105
ཇི་ལྟར་སྤུན་ལྕན་འབྲུ་ཡི་སྙིང་པོ་ནི། །
མི་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ནི་སྤྱད་བྱར་མི་འགྱུར་བ། 1
ཟས་སོགས་དོན་དུ་གཉེར་བ་གང་ཡིན་པ། །
དེ་དག་གིས་ནི་སྦུན་ནས་དེ་འབྱིན་ལྟར།
Kernels of grains, still in their husks, are unusable for man. Whoever wants them as
food must remove them from their husks.
A grain when still in its husk is not fit to be eaten by man. Those seeking food and
sustenance remove the Igrain} from its husk.
#3: Grain and husk. To
eat the grain, the husk
must first be removed
For example, a person cannot use something like a fruit or rice that has a husk or
skin as food. So when they need to eat this, they will remove the skin or the
husk.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
82



106
དེ་བཞིན་སེམས་ཅན་ལ་ཡོད་ཉོན་མོངས་ཀྱི། །
དྲི་མ་དང་འདྲེས་རྒྱལ་བའང་ཇི་སྲིད་དུ། 1
ཉོན་མོངས་དྲི་མ་འདྲེས་ལས་མ་གྲོལ་བ། 1
དེ་སྲིད་རྒྱལ་མཛད་སྲིད་གསུམ་འདུ་མི་བྱེད། །
Similarly, whilst Buddhahood, present in all beings but mixed with defilement-
impurities, has not been from defilement freed then Buddha-activity in the three worlds
will not be accomplished.
[The nature of the Victorious One, which is present within beings (but/ mixed with the
defilement of the poisons, is similar to this. While it is not freed from being mingled
with the pollution of these afflictions, the deeds of the Victor will not be displayed) in
the three realms of existence.
Likewise, the infinite
Buddha activities cannot
manifest while Buddha-
nature is wrapped with
emotions
Now the meaning. Likewise, as long as Buddha-nature is wrapped with
emotions, then the infinite activities of the Buddha cannot manifest.
107
ཇི་ལྟར་སཱ་ལུ་བྲ་བོ་ནས་འབྲུའི་སྙིང་པོ་སྦྱིན་ལས་མ་བྱུང་གྲྭ་མ་ཅན།
ལེགས་པར་མ་བསྒྲུབས་མི་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ནི་སྤྱད་བྱ་བཟའ་བ་ཞིམ་པོར་མི་འགྱུར་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་སེམས་ཅན་ལ་ཡོད་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག་ཉོན་མོངས་སྦུབས་ལས་མ་གྲོལ་ལུས། ། Į
ཉོན་མོངས་བཀྲེས་པས་ཉེན་པའི་འགྲོ་ལ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དགའ་བའི་རོ་སྟེར་འགྱུར་བ་མིན། །
Incompletely-threshed kernels of rice, buckwheat and barley that have not been de-
husked still have their husks and beards. Just as these are not usable, tasty food for
men, likewise the "ord of all qualities" present in living beings, and whose corps has
not yet been freed from defilement, will not give the taste of the joy of Dharma to
beings afflicted by defilement-hunger.
Unthreshed grains of rice, buckwheat or barley, which not having emerged from their
husks still have husk and beard, cannot be turned into delicious food that is palatable
for man. Likewise the Lord of Qualities is present within all beings, but his body is not
liberated from the shroud of the poisons. Thus his body cannot bestow the joyous taste
of Dharma upon sentieni beings stricken by the famine of their afflictions.
This example emphasis
the negative aspect more.
Until the defilements are
removed, Buddha-nature
cannot be used, just as
the husk must be
removed for the grain to
be used
Once again, we return to the example for the third time. Maitreya really wants us
to understand this! Each of these examples is slightly different. For example,
here there is more emphasis on the negative aspect. For example, until the husk
of the rice is taken off, then you cannot eat it. You cannot use it. Likewise, as
long as this kham, the Buddha-nature, is wrapped with emotions, then this
Buddha-nature will not fulfil the hunger of sentient beings, meaning that this
Buddha-nature is useless. Maybe "useless" is too strong, but it cannot be used.
Example #4: The Gold and the Filth
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
83



108
ཇི་ལྟར་རབ་ཏུ་རྒྱུ་ཚེ་མི་ཡི་གསེར། །
ལྗན་ལྗིན་རུལ་བའི་གནས་སུ་ལྷུང་གྱུར་པ། །
མི་འཇིག་ཆོས་ཅན་དེ་ནི་དེར་དེ་བཞིན།
ལོ་བརྒྱུ་མང་པོ་དག་ཏུ་གནས་པ་དེ། །
The gold of a man on a journey dropped into a place containing filth arot. Being of
indestructible nature, for many centuries that gold remained in that same place yet
quite unchanged.
.
While a man was travelling, gold he owned fell into a place filled with rotting reluse.
This (gold), being of indestructible nature, remained for many centuries just as it was.
09
ལྷ་མིག་རྣམ་དག་དང་ལྡན་ལྷ་ཡིས་དེར།
མཐོང་ནས་མི་ལ་འདི་ན་ཡོད་པའི་གསེར། །
རིན་ཆེན་མཆོག་འདི་སྐྱུངས་ཏེ་རིན་ཆེན་གྱིས། །
བསྒྲུབ་བར་བྱ་བ་གྱིས་ཞེས་ཟླ་བ་ལྟར། །
A god with perfect divine vision noticed it there told someone, "There is gold here.
Once you have cleansed this most valued thing then do what can be done with such a
precious substance."
Then a god with completely pure divine vision saw it there and addressed a man:
"Purify this supremely precious gold lying here in this [filth) and then convert it into
something that is worth being made from such a precious substance!"
#4: Gold coin dropped in
filth. It will remain there
unchanged until found
and cleaned. A divine
being sees the gold coin,
and tells a man to clean it
and make it into
something worthy of its
value
A person with a gold coin is roaming around, and while roaming around, the gold
coin drops into some garbage or dirty ground. And this gold coin will remain
there until it is found or manipulated by another cause. And as long as it is not
found, it will stay there for hundreds of years. And then someone with a divine
eye sees the gold coin, and then tells a man that this precious item be cleaned
and purified, and then made into something that is worthy of its value, such as
an ornament, or even better a statue of the Buddha or something like that.
དེ་བཞིན་ཐུབ་པས་མི་གཙང་དང་འདྲ་བའི།
ཉོན་མོངས་སུ་བྱིང་སེམས་ཅན་ཡོན་ཏན་ནི། །
གཟིགས་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་འདམ་དེ་དག་བྱའི་ཕྱིར། །
སྐྱེ་དགུ་རྣམས་ལ་དམ་ཚེ
མས་ལ་དམ་ཆོས་ཆུ་ཆར་འབེབས། །
In a similar way, the Victors see the quality of beings, which has sunken into the filth-
like defilements, and shower upon them true Dharma's rain that they be purified of
defilement's mire.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
34



Likewise the Muni sees the quality fol] beings, which is sunken in the filth-like mental
poisons, and pours his rain of sacred Dharma upon them to purify the muddiness of
their afflictions
Likewise, Buddha sees
Buddha-nature fallen into
the garbage of emotion
and obscuration, which he
cleans by showering a
rain of compassion on
beings
Likewise, Buddha sees this Buddha-nature fallen in the midst of the garbage, the
mud of emotions and obscurations. And in order to purify these obscurations,
he showers a rain of compassion upon sentient beings.
ཇི་ལྟར་ལྡན་ལྗིན་རུལ་པའི་གནས་སུ་ལྷུང་བའི་གསེར་ནི་ལྷ་ཡིས་མཐོང་གྱུར་ནས། །
ཀུན་ཏུ་དག་པར་བྱ་ཕྱིར་མཆོག་ཏུ་མཛེས་པ་མི་ལ་ནན་གྱིས་སྟོན་པ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་རྒྱལ་བས་ཉོན་མོངས་མི་གཙང་ཆེན་པོར་ལྷུང་གྱུར་རྫོགས་སངས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ། །
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་ལ་གཟིགས་ནས་དེ་དག་བྱ་ཕྱིར་ལུས་ཅན་རྣམས་ལ་ཆོས་སྟོན་ཏོ། །
just as the gold fallen into the place arot with garbage was seen there by a god who
then with great insistence showed the man that most supremely-beautiful of things, so
that it might be completely cleansed, so also do the victors perceive that most precious,
perfect Buddhahood within all beings has fallen in the defilements' great mire and so
they teach them all the Dharma in order that in may be purified.
Once the god has seen the gold that has fallen into the place full of rotting retuse,
insistently he directs the man's attention to this supremely beautiful thing so he may
completely cleanse it. Seeing within all heings the precious perfect Buddha that has
fallen into the great filth of the mental poisons, the Victorious One does likewise and
teaches the Dharma lo persuade them to purity it.
Likewise, the Buddha
turns the wheel
Dharma to point out
Buddha-nature, which is
like the lost gold coin, to
ignorant beings
Once again, we have the example and the meaning together. When someone
with a divine eye sees the gold coin that has fallen into the garbage, in order to
make this gold coin worthy of its value, he will point it out to the man who lost it.
Likewise, with their infinite wisdom and compassion, Buddhas will turn the wheel
of the Dharma in order to point out Buddha-nature, which is like the lost gold
coin, to ignorant sentient beings.
These examples might
seem to contradict
Madhyamika, where true
existence is always
negated, and there is
nothing independent,
permanent and one
Well as you can see, we have some very extensive examples and statements of
the Buddha-nature. In the Madhyamika shastras, true existence is always
negated. Nothing truly exists. This is the case not only the Madhyamika, but
even in the common vehicle such as the Shravakayana. For instance, in the
Shravaka path, they use many different methods to establish the notion that
there is no truly existent hand, to take a simple example. If it did exist truly,
there are only three ways that it could exist truly. The three conditions for true
existence are that it should exist as independent, permanent, and one. This is a
very big thing, especially for the Sautrantika and Vaibashika schools, that talk
about this a lot. And people like Shantarakshita have brought that subject all the
way up to Madhyamika. If you read his "Ornament of the Middle Way" (uma gyen),
you will find a lot written about it there. For example, we think that today's hand
is yesterday's hand. Of course we do. But when we think that it's the same
hand, we're clinging to the idea of permanence. And this is why we don't feel
For example, when we
think today's hand is the
same as yesterday's hand,
we cling to the idea of
permanence, and then we
get unhappy when we see
we have wrinkles
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
85



In the Shravakayana, this
impermanence is proof
that the hand does not
truly exist
happy when we see wrinkles, because it contradicts our notion that our hand is
permanent. If it's permanent, why does it have wrinkles? We can't understand
that. It's unacceptable. But in the Shravakayana, they say that this is proof that
the hand is not truly existent.
We forget that our hand is
dependent on everything
else. We know it a little
on the ordinary level,
which is why we buy
moisturiser, but not
completely
Next, we always think that our hand is independent. Or perhaps I should say that
we forget the fact that the existence of our hand, and its movement for instance,
depends on everything else. For example, my hand depends on everything,
including this flower that I'm holding, even including this tent not falling on my
hand. We know this a little bit on an ordinary level, which is why we buy
moisturizer. But we don't know it completely. We can see that we don't know
this completely, because we trust that moisturiser will take care of the wrinkles.
We don't know that there are so many other causes and conditions that need to
be cleaned, not only the dry skin. And this again proves, for a second time, that
our hand doesn't truly exist. The word 'truly' is such a big word.
Moisturiser alone will not
take care of wrinkles, as
there are so many other
causes and conditions
We see the hand as one
thing, instead of the skin,
blood, bones etc.
For all these reasons, the
hand does not truly exist
And when we look at our hand, we always see it as one thing - a whole so-called
hand. For instance, we say 'let me shake hands with you'. We don't say 'let us
touch our skin, blood, bones, nail and hair'! Especially hair - some people have a
lot of hair, and sweat! But we think there is one phenomenon that's called
"hand'. That's how the Shravakayana path analyses things. It's a really profound
path, and should never be disparaged. The Theravada path is an object of
homage.
The Mahayana goes
further, and dismanties
the idea of 'parts' not just
the idea of the whole
In all Buddhist schools,
especially in Mahayana,
we cannot say mind truly
exists, it contradicts the
notion of enlightenment
The Mahayana goes even further. Let's not go through this too much now, but
for instance, it's somehow easier to understand and get rid of clinging to the
idea of the whole. But not many theologians (drumta) have the courage to
dismantle the parts as well. This is why the idea of 'one' is defeated by many
schools, but the idea of 'parts' (dulma) is only defeated by certain schools. Again
I'm getting pulled by the Madhyamika system, as the idea of not truly existing is
very important in the Madhyamika. Therefore, in all Buddhist systems, and
especially in the Mahayana, we cannot say that there is a truly existing mind.
Speaking of a truly existing mind and then inviting the notion of enlightenment is
a contradiction.
Some scholars believe the
absence of true existence
can be referred to as
Buddha-nature
Mipham disagrees.
Stones don't truly exist,
but they don't have
Buddha-nature either.
'Form is emptiness' is not
enough. We also need
'emptiness is form'
Many scholars of the past thought that the absence of true existence alone is a
good enough quality to be referred to as the Buddha-nature, although people
like Mipham Rinpoche disagree. Because stones and trees also do not truly exist,
but they don't have Buddha-nature. So the lack of true existence alone is not
enough of a qualification to say that this is the Buddha-nature. Saying that form
is emptiness is not enough. We must also say that emptiness is form. Let me tell
you something quite subtle. There are certain schools that also think that just
because something is not truly existent does not mean that it's the Buddha-
nature. But then they add something. For example, some people say that the
not truly existing mind is the Buddha-nature, but again Mipham Rinpoche will
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
86



Mipham also disagrees
with scholars who identify
Buddha-nature with
something compounded,
like truly existing mind
disagree with that. According to Maitreya, when you achieve enlightenment, you
are not getting anything new. You are only getting what you already have. But
mind is a compounded phenomenon. So if you believe that the not truly existing
mind is the Buddha-nature, you will have to face the consequence that the
qualities of the Buddha will become impermanent.
So what is the clarity and
cognition aspect of
Buddha-nature if it isn't
mind?
So what about the cognition aspect or clarity aspect of the Buddha-nature
(selwa)? I'm not sure if the word 'clarity' says enough, because I don't feel that it
has the connotation of cognition and omniscience, which it should have.
Anyway, we must now ask what is this cognition aspect of the Buddha-nature.
According to Mipham Rinpoche, it's not mind. It is wisdom. This is what I was
telling you yesterday. It is not inanimate, but that does not mean that it is
animate in the sense of mind. It is wisdom.
It is not inanimate, nor is
it animate in the sense of
mind. It is wisdom
Even in Tibetan, we must
clarify that clarity'
includes awareness and
cognition
Uncompounded Buddha-
nature cannot be the
result of compounded
mind
Tulku Jigme Rinpoche was just telling me that even in Tibetan we have to clarify
the meaning of the word 'clarity' (selwa), because we need to add the aspect of
awareness and cognition (rigpa). So I suppose 'clarity' is fine. There is an
important reason why Mipham Rinpoche is so persistent on this point.
Remember yesterday we talked about how if you plant rice, rice will grow, not
barley. You see, if you think that the not truly existent mind is the Buddha-
nature, then you are planting mind, which is a compounded phenomenon, and
yet what grows is an uncompounded phenomenon. And that is absolutely not
right. So why are we practicing? The whole reason that we practice the path is
because defilements are removable (drima dralrung), and because sentient beings
can achieve enlightenment (sang jarung), as they have that potential. The
possibility of the Buddhahood is there because of Buddha-nature, and this
Buddha-nature has got nothing to do with a mind that is not truly existent.
We practice because
defitements are
removable, drima dral
rung
We differentiate between
two kinds of nirvana - one
with residue (nirvana),
and one without
(parinirvana)
In the common vehicle,
the Buddha's body is the
truth of suffering, and
thus not an ultimate
object of refuge
Generally, when we talk about nirvana, we talk about two kinds of nirvana:
nirvana with remainder or residue, and without: nirvana and parinirvana.
According to the common vehicle, it is believed that Shakyamuni Buddha's body
is the truth of suffering. From the moment he was born in Lumbini, all the way
to when he passed into parinirvana in Kushinagar, his body - including the locks
of hair, everything - is the truth of suffering, and therefore it is not the ultimate
object of refuge. Although, of course, you will still obtain a lot of merit by
offering alms to this body. Also this is why they say in the common vehicle that
Shakyamuni Buddha had all the symptoms of a human body. For example, he
grew up, he produced Rahula with Yasodhara, he even had thorns piercing the
sole of his feet, and he died. Basically, that's the perspective of the common
vehicle, which is why they see that the Buddha's mind is the only ultimate object
of refuge. So in the common vehicle, from the time that Buddha Shakyamuni was
enlightened under the bodhi tree, until he passed into parinirvana at Kushinagar,
this enlightenment is called 'enlightenment with residue', with remainder. Only
after he passed into parinirvana, when he exhausted the last truth of suffering,
did he achieve parinirvana, enlightenment without any residue or remainder.
For them, only the
Buddha's mind is an
ultimate object of refuge,
and he only passed into
parinirvana when he
exhausted the last truth
of suffering at Kushinagar
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
87



The Mahayana explains all
this as a nirmanakaya
manifestation, a show
that depends on the
audience's perception
Some like Devadatta saw
nothing. Others attained
the first bhumi just by
looking at a painting of
the Buddha
The Mahayana talks about all this quite differently. The Mahayana thinks that all
this is a nirmanakaya manifestation. From the time that Buddha descended from
Tushita heaven, all the way until he passed into parinirvana, all of this is his
manifestation. This means it's like a show, which means we're talking about an
audience. And so much depends on the audience and their perception. There
are some audiences like Buddha's cousin Devadatta, who didn't see anything at
all special with the Buddha. And there are other audiences like a certain princess
in Sri Lanka, who achieved the first bhumi just by looking at a painting of the
Buddha. So, as soon as we talk about a manifestation Buddha, we are indicating
that there must be a 'real' Buddha, the manifester who is behind this
manifestation. And this manifester has all the qualities such as the 32 major
marks and all of that; it's not like some formless deity that manifests. And every
quality, even the lock of hair of this manifester Buddha, is uncompounded. It has
to be.
Behind the manifestation
Buddha is the one who
manifests, one with all the
uncompounded Buddha
qualities
The word uncompounded
is just a label. It refers to
something that is beyond
both compounded and
uncompounded. Buddha
is not a phenomenon
However, concepts such as 'uncompounded' are actually only a label here. When
we use words like 'compounded' and 'uncompounded', we're not referring to
uncompounded in the usual sense. Here we are talking about the kind of
uncompounded that is beyond compounded and uncompounded. Basically we
are saying that Buddha-nature, the Buddha, is not a phenomenon. Because when
we talk about phenomena, then we are talking about perception, and that doesn't
work. These are some words from Mipham Rinpoche, extracted from "The Lion's
Roar Which Points Out The Shentong View".
Day 7 - Introduction
The nine examples are
very important for
Mahayana and tantric
practitioners
We are going through the nine examples, and we covered four of them yesterday.
Although you may not understand the whole of the Uttaratantra, I would
encourage you to really make a note of these nine examples. They are so
important, especially for Mahayana practitioners, and eventually also for tantric
practitioners. They're not that difficult to understand, and they're talking about
us as we are now, not describing something we will have in the future. If you
understand these examples, then it will help you understand when you hear
masters using expressions such as 'here, now, this very moment, this present
moment, or 'this ordinary mind'. When you receive such teachings in the future,
and when you practice them, all this information will definitely help you.
They will help you in
future when you hear
masters use expressions
like "this ordinary mind"
or "this very moment,
present moment"
We perform Buddhist
practice to accumulate
merit, purify defilements
and thus reveal what we
already have
Why do we perform very ordinary, common Buddhist practices such as fasting?
So that we will accumulate merit and purify defilements in order to reveal what
we have. Why do some people shave their hair, go to caves and sit there in
solitude for many years? To reveal these things that we have, which Lord
Maitreya has very profoundly explained with these nine examples. This goes all
the way up to atiyoga, when the guru makes a very simple remark to introduce
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
88



Even the Madhyamika
consequentialists are only
negating arising to help
us remove the husk from
the grain
you to the nature of the mind. What is really happening there is not other than
revealing what we have been describing. Even in the Madhyamika, where we
have the seven-fold analysis of the chariot, the negation of self-arising, other-
arising, and all of that - why do we do that? Why do the Madhyamika
philosophers do that? Why are followers of the Prasangika Madhyamika even
called consequentialists? It's not because they want to be irritable philosophers,
with berets and cigars in their mouths! What they are doing is none other than
simply taking off the husk, the skin, or the shell. The problem with us is that we
think the husk is the rice! Therefore the purpose of all these methods is not
other than washing, purifying the mud, garbage, and the earth that's covering
the gold coin.
Our problem is that we
think the husk is the rice,
so all these methods are
to purify our defilements
Buddha qualities are
inconceivable, but we still
talk about them for the
sake of practitioners
For a general audience,
we might say
enlightenment is a state
free from paranoia or
obsession, but there's no
benefit in speaking of the
uncompounded ushnisha
I'd like to tell you something quite important. You know, the qualities of the
Buddha-nature are infinite. Maitreya said they are inconceivable. But for the
sake of practitioners, we still have to talk about them, despite the lack of words
and language. And for a very general audience, if they ask what enlightenment
is, at times it's much easier to say that enlightenment is nothing but the absence
of paranoia or obsession. That's all they can understand and they like that. If
there is a state where there's no paranoia, that sounds nice and they will aim for
that. For this kind of ordinary audience, if we tell them about the uncompounded
lock of hair and the ushnisha, it's just not conceivable.
For others, it's easier to
speak of peeling the husk
rather than the qualities
of the infinite omniscient
ever-manifesting rice
And then there are many people who are very simple-minded. For them, it's
much easier to talk about getting rid of the husk, rather than to talk about the
rice that you cannot see at the moment because of the husk. It just won't work.
They're simple-minded, so you can't talk about what's inside the husk, because
all they can see is the husk. So it's better to talk about removing the husk,
instead of the brilliant, infinite, ever-manifesting rice. You can't talk about the
ever-present omnipotent, omniscient rice! It won't work. And you know, when
we say that enlightenment is simply an absence of paranoia, that's a very
attractive notion for limited and simple-minded people. Nobody wants to be
paranoid. I'm sure all the psychologists and psychiatrists in the audience could
explain this.
Absence of paranoia is a
very attractive notion for
simple people
Absence of paranoia isn't
mere nothingness. It
opens up many great
qualities, which are the
equivalent of the kudang
yeshey, the nanas and
kayas
But the absence of paranoia is something very limited. It might be something
very simple, like maybe you have an obsession that involves replacing the
handset ten times every time you finish making a phone call. If you could get rid
of that paranoia and reduce it to maybe just twice, that would be a wonderful
achievement! And what could this do for you? It opens many great qualities. For
example, it takes time to replace the handset ten times, and if you bring it down
to just twice, you'll free up a lot of time. And that is what we call kudang yeshey,
the jñanas, kayas, 32 major marks, 80 minor marks and so on. It's a bit like that.
We are talking about the qualities that you obtain when you are free from
something. When you are free from paranoia, what's happening to you? It's not
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
89



like paranoia is gone and then full stop. The absence of paranoia is something
great, and that greatness is what we have been talking about here.
Many people practice
Buddhism to become
more happy and relaxed,
or perhaps less inhibited,
and come out of the
closet. All this is already
good, an object of
veneration, but
enlightenment is so much
more
People nowadays think that by practicing Buddhism you gain some self-control.
You become more sober, maybe slightly happier. Maybe it's not that extreme. I
don't know. In any case, that's good. Even that idea is an object of veneration,
but here we have to talk about something more. My guess is that many of us are
meditating and aiming for a state of that is more relaxed. That's also good!
Relaxation is also a very necessary object of veneration. And some people go a
little further, and become slightly less inhibited. It's as if they feel it's OK to
come out of the closet. That's also very good. Many religions don't even have a
path to do that! It's wonderful to have that.
Most of us have a very
limited view of
enlightenment,
associating it with people
who are gentle or
outrageous
But qualities like being
relaxed and carefree can
be obtained with Prozac
Obtaining the
uncompounded lock of
Buddha's hair is
something very different
But enlightenment, Buddhahood is not something limited like being able to come
out of the closet! I'm telling you this because most people have such a limited
view of enlightenment. They say things like a person must be enlightened,
because he's so gentle and he's always smiling. Or some say the opposite, that
he must be enlightened because he's so outrageous. This is so limited! These
are all compounded phenomena. Most of the qualities that we associate with so-
called enlightenment these days, like being relaxed or carefree, I think they're
obtainable with Prozac! But the Buddha's hair, now that's difficult! And yet, at
the same time, you have it! The rice is inside the husk. And that's the amazing
aspect of these examples. It's incredible. Only people like Maitreya can talk
about these things, because he's the Buddha in waiting. And those of us who are
not that diligent, like myself, might as well get used to his language and his
teachings, because the next 'reign' will be under his control!
Example #5: The Treasure and the Earth
112
ཇི་ལྟར་མི་དབུལ་ཁྱིམ་ནང་ས་འོག་ན། །
མི་ཟད་པ་ཡི་གཏེར་ནི་ཡོད་གྱུར་ལ། 1
མི་དེས་དེ་མ་ཤེས་ཏེ་གཏེར་དེ་ཡང་། 1
དེ་ལ་ང་འདིར་ཡོད་ཅེས་མི་སྨྲ་ལྟར། !
1
Were there an inexhaustible treasure underground beneath the house of a poor man,
neither would he
its presence nor could the treasure tell him: "Here I am".
If an inexhaustible treasure were buried in the ground beneath a poor man's house, the
man would not know of it and the treasure would not speak and tell him "I am here!"
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
90



(#5) A source of endless
treasure is under a poor
man's house. But he
doesn't know it's there,
and the treasure doesn't
tell him
The fifth example is a source of endless treasure underneath a poor man's
house, and he doesn't know that it's there. And this is an interesting point - the
treasure doesn't tell him that it's there.
113
དེ་བཞིན་ཡིད་ཀྱི་ནང་ཆུད་རིན་ཆེན་གཏེར། །
དྲི་མེད་གཞག་དང་བསལ་མེད་ཆོས་ཉིད་ཀྱང་། །
མ་རྟོགས་པས་ན་དབུལ་བའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ནི། །
རྣམ་མང་རྒྱུན་དུ་སྐྱེ་དགུ་འདིས་མྱོང་ངོ། །
Similarly, as beings have not realized the very precious treasure contained within their
mind, the immaculate True nature to which nothing need to be added and from which
nothing need to be taken, they continually experience many kinds of suffering of
"deprivation".
Likewise a precious treasure is contained in each being's mind. This is its true state,
which is free from defilement. Nothing is to be added and nothing to be removed.
Nevertheless, since they do not realize this, sentient beings continuously undergo the
manifold sufferings of deprivation.
Similarly, we all have the
Buddha-nature within us,
a source of endless
treasure. But we don't
know it's there. This
example is important for
people who think they
have faults
Likewise, even though the endless source of treasure, the Buddha-nature, is
within sentient beings, this source of treasure also doesn't say that it's there.
And because we don't know that this source of treasure exists within us, we go
through the suffering of poverty because of the lack of enlightened qualities.
This is a really important example for people who think they have faults or they
have no merit. They should realise that they have great merit - all kinds of outer,
inner, and secret merit.
ཇི་ལྟར་དབུལ་པོའི་ཁྱིམ་ནང་དུ་ནི་རིན་ཆེན་གཏེར་ཆུད་གྱུར་པའི་མི་ལ་ནི། །
རིན་ཆེན་གཏེར་བདག་ཡོད་ཅེས་རྗོད་པར་མི་བྱེད་དེ་ནི་མི་ཡིས་ཤེས་མིན་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཆོས་གཏེར་ཡིད་ཀྱི་ཁྱིམ་གནས་སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་ནི་དབུལ་པོ་ལྟ་བུ་སྟེ། །
དེ་དག་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་དེ་ཐོབ་བྱ་ཕྱིར་འཇིག་རྟེན་དུ་ནི་དྲང་སྲོང་ཡང་དག་བལྟམས། །
The jewel treasure contained in the poor man's house would not tell him: "I the
precious treasure am here" and the man would never know it there. All beings, who
have the dharmakaya treasure within the mansion of their mind, are to that poor man
similar. So the Great Sages have taken worldly birth in a most perfect way so that those
that treasure could obtain.
When a precious treasure is contained within the ground beneath a poor man's house,
the treasure cannot tell him "I am here!" (and the man does not know of its presence.
Like the poor man, beings are {unaware that Dharma's treasure lies in the house of their
minds and the great Sage truly takes birth within the world to cause them to attain {this
treasure)
Although there's a source of treasure underneath the poor man's house, the poor
person doesn't know this, and the treasure doesn't report that it's there, so the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
91



Sentient beings live in a
house, their physical
body. But they don't
know about the source of
treasure beneath, the
Dharmadhatu. The
Buddha teaches so that
they may obtain that
wealth
person doesn't realise that he's sitting on top of it. Likewise, we sentient beings
live in a house, in this body, in this form. And beneath it there is the source of
treasure, the Dharmadhatu (chökyi ying). But because we don't know about it, we
go through the suffering of poverty. Therefore the Buddha, the rishi or truth-
teller, turns the wheel of the Dharma in order for sentient beings to obtain that
wealth.
Example #6: The Shoot and the Fruit-skin
115
ཇི་ལྟར་ཨ་མ་ལ་སོགས་ཤིང་འབྲས་ལ།
ཡོད་པའི་ཨ་བོན་སྨྱུ་གུ་འཇིག་མེད་ཆོས། །
ས་རྨོས་ཆུ་སོགས་ལྡན་པའི་ལྗོན་ཤིང་གི། 1
རྒྱལ་པོའི་དངོས་པོ་རིམ་གྱིས་འགྲུབ་པ་ལྟར། །
Just as the imperishable quality of germinating in the seeds of mangoes and other fruits,
in the presence of prepared soil, water and so on, the body a kingly tree will
gradually produce,
The seed contained in the fruit of a mango or similar trees ſis possessed off the
indestructible property of sprouting. Once it gets ploughed-earth, water and the other
conditions), the substance of a majestic tree will gradually come about.
(#6) The mango fruit,
which contains a seed
that will grow into the
king of trees
The next example is of fruit ike the mango (amra). These fruits ave seeds
inside. When the seed encounters the right conditions such as ploughing and
fertilizer and all that, and as long as it does not encounter obstacles that will
destroy it, then the result, the shoot, will come. And that becomes the mango
tree, the king of trees.
116
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་ཀྱི་མ་རིག་སོགས་འབྲས་ཀྱི། །
པགས་སྦུབས་ནང་ཆུད་ཆོས་ཁམས་དགེ་བ་ཡང་
། །
དེ་བཞིན་དགེ་བ་དེ་དེ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས། །
རིམ་གྱིས་ཐུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོའི་དངོས་པོར་འགྱུར།
So also within the rind-confine of beings' ignorance etc, is contained the pure Dharma
nature. Likewise, when by virtue it is sustained, it will the very substance of a "king of
victors" gradually attain.
The fruit consisting of the ignorance and the other defects of beings contains in the
shroud of its peel the virtuous element of the Dharma{kayal. Likewise, through relying
on virtue, this ſelement also will gradually turn into the substance of a King of Munis.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
92



Sentient beings'
ignorance is like a skin
that obscures the kham.
This example indicates
that the ground and result
are the same
Sentient beings have ignorance that is like a skin or a wrapping, and inside this
wrapping is the kham. Here we are using the word 'virtue' (gewa), to refer to
Buddha-nature. And then by the power of this virtue, gradually this kham, this
Buddha-nature becomes the Victorious One. I think this example is quite
interesting because there is a seed inside the fruit, and the fruit also happens to
be the result. It indicates that the ground and the result are the same.
ཆུ་དང་ཉི་མའི་འོད་དང་རླུང་དང་ས་དུས་ནམ་མཁའི་རྐྱེན་རྣམས་ཀྱིས། །
ཏ་ལ་དང་ནི་ཨ་མའི་འབྲས་སྦུབས་གསེབ་ནས་ཤིང་སྐྱེ་ཇི་ལྟར་བར། །
སེམས་ཅན་ཉོན་མོངས་འབྲས་ལྤགས་ནང་ཆུད་རྫོགས་སངས་
ངས་ས་བོན་སྨྱུ་གུ་ཡང་།
དེ་བཞིན་དགེ་རྐྱེན་དེ་དང་དེ་ལས་ཆོས་མཐོང་འཕེལ་བར་འགྱུར་བ་ཡིན། 1
just as a free grows from within a banana or mango fruit's skin, due to conditions-
humidity, sunlight, air, soil, space and time, likewise is the seed and germ of perfect
Buddhahood contained within the skin of that “fruit"-sentient beings' defilements; due
to virtue's condition, this true nature will be seen and augment.
By means of water, sunlight, wind, time and space, the necessary conditions, the tree
grows from within the narrow shroud of the fruit of a banana or mango. Similarly the
fertile seed of the Perfect Buddha, contained within the fruit-skin of the mental poisons
of beings, also grows from the virtue as its necessary condition, until the shoot of
Dharma is seen and augmented {towards perfection.
With the right conditions
such as virtuous actions,
the Buddha-nature will be
revealed and stabilised
The example is explained once again. There are many conditions that give birth
to fruits like the mango and the banana palm, such as the warmth of the sun, air,
earth, time and space. Similarly, the Buddha-nature is contained within the skin
of sentient beings' emotions, and with the right causes and conditions such as
virtuous actions, the Dharmadhatu or Buddha-nature will be revealed, increased
and stabilised.
Example #7: The Statue and the Tattered Rag
ཇི་ལྟར་རིན་ཆེན་ལས་བྱས་རྒྱལ་བའི་གཟུགས། །
གོས་ཧྲུལ་དྲི་ངན་གྱིས་ནི་གཏུམས་གྱུར་པ། །
ལམ་གནས་ལྷ་ཡིས་མཐོང་ནས་གྲོལ་བྱའི་ཕྱིར། །
ལག་གནས་དོན་དེ་དེ་ལ་སྨྲ་བ་ལྟར།
A god, having by the road a precious image of a tathagata discovered, all wrapped in
smelly tattered rags, would tell someone the fact of it lying there at the roadside, so that
it might be recovered.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
93



An image of the Victorious One made from precious material lies by the road, wrapped
in an evil-smelling tattered rag. Upon seeing this, a god will alert the (passers by to its
presence by the road to cause its retrieval.
(#7) A precious statue of
the Buddha wrapped in
rags and left lying by the
roadside
Now, the seventh example. A statue of Buddha made of precious gems is
wrapped in rags and left lying by the roadside. A person with a divine eye will
see this and tell someone about this statue, so that he can unwrap and reveal it.
119
ཐོགས་མེད་སྤྱན་མངའ་རྣམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱི། ། |
ཉོན་རྨོངས་ཀྱིས་གཏུམས་བདེ་གཤེགས་དངོས་པོ་ཉིད། །
དུད་འགྲོ་ལ་ཡང་གཟིགས་ནས་དེ་བཞིན་དེ། །
ཐར་པར་བྱ་བའི་དོན་དུ་ཐབས་སྟོན་མཛད། །
Similarly, when the Buddhas, of unhindered vision, see the very "substance" of the
tathagatas (even in animals present) but wrapped within the envelope of defilement,
they also show the means by which it may be set free.
Likewise, being possessed of unhindered vision (the Buddha) sees the substance of the
Sugata wrapped in the multitude of the mental poisons, even in animals, and teaches
the means to free it.
Buddha sees the nature
within sentient beings
wrapped by all kinds of
temporary emotions
Buddha has unobstructed omniscience which is like the divine eye, and he sees
the Buddha-nature within sentient beings wrapped by all kinds of temporary
emotions, even within those of lowly birth such as animals. In order to liberate
beings from these wrappings, the emotions, and reveal their true nature, Buddha
engages in all kinds of methods.
120
ཇི་ལྟར་རིན་ཆེན་རང་བཞིན་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་སྐུ་དྲིངན་གོས་གཏུམས་པ། །
ལམ་གནས་ལྷ་ཡི་མིག་གིས་མཐོང་ནས་ཐར་ཕྱིར་མི་ལ་སྟོན་པ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཉོན་མོངས་གོས་ཧྲུལ་གྱིས་གཏུམས་འཁོར་བའི་ལམ་ན་གནས་པའི་ཁམས།
དུད་འགྲོ་ལ་ཡང་གཟིགས་ནས་ཐར་བར་བྱ་ཕྱིར་རྒྱལ་བ་ཆོས་སྟོན་ཏོ། །
1
A god with divine vision who had perceived the tathagata image, precious by nature yet
wrapped in smelly rags and lying by the road, would point it out to folk that it might be
freed. Just like that, the victors see (even in animals) the Buddha-nature, lying by
samsara's road, wrapped in defilements tattered garb and they teach the Dharma in
order that it might be liberated.
When his eye perceives the statue of the Tathagata, which is of precious nature but
wrapped in a stinking rag and lying by the road, the god points it out to passers by, so
that they retrieve it. Likewise the Victor sees that the element, wrapped in the tattered
garments of the poisons and lying on samsara's road, is present even within animals,
and teaches the Dharma so that it may be released.
The one who has divine eyes sees the statue of the Buddha made out of precious
gems and wrapped in ragged clothes lying by the roadside, and he points this
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
94



Seeing the nature
wrapped in rags, the
Buddha engages in all
kinds of methods, like
turning the wheel of the
Dharma
out to those who don't see, like ordinary human beings. Likewise the victorious
ones see the Buddha-nature wrapped with emotions even within animals, and so
the Buddhas engage in all kinds of methods such as turning the wheel of the
Dharma.
Example #8: The Chakravartin and the Woman
121
ཇི་ལྟར་མིམོ་གཟུགས་ངན་མགོན་མེད་འགའ། །
མགོན་མེད་འདུག་གནས་སུ་ནི་འདུག་གྱུར་ལ། །
མངལ་གྱིས་རྒྱལ་པོའི་དཔལ་ནི་འཛིན་བྱེད་པས། །
རང་ལྟོ་ན་ཡོད་མི་བདག་མི་ཤེས་ལྟར། །
An ugly looking woman, having no one to whom to turn and staying in a pauper-home
may hold the glory of a king within her very womb yet not know this ruler of men to be
within her present.
A woman of miserable appearance who is without protection and abides in a
poorhouse holds in her womb a glorious king, not knowing that a lord of man dwells in
her own body.
(#8) A plain and destitute
woman feels unprotected
and yet she is pregnant
with the chakravartin, the
ultimate protector
Now we come to the eighth example, which is of a woman who is not beautiful,
and who is completely without protection. She is in a very strange place, like an
empty, abandoned house or cave, and she is full of fear, facing all kinds of
unexpected situations. But she doesn't know that inside her womb is the real
protector, the universal king. So she continues to think that she is despised and
abused.
122
སྲིད་པར་སྐྱེ་བ་མགོན་མེད་ཁྱིམ་བཞིན་ཏེ། །
མ་དག་སེམས་ཅན་མངལ་ལྡན་བུད་མེད་བཞིན། །
དེ་ལ་གང་ཞིག་ཡོད་པས་མགོན་བཅས་པ། །
དྲི་མེད་ཁམས་ནི་དེ་ཡི་མངལ་གནས་བཞིན། །
Worldly existence is like the pauper hostel and impure beings are like the pregnant
woman. Having his being within her, she has a protector and the embryo is like the
immaculate nature.
Birth in an existence is similar to the poorhouse, Impure beings are like the woman
bearing la king) in her womb. Since he is present within her, she has protection. The
undefiled element is like (the king) who dwells in her womb.
Likewise, sentient beings are born in this samsara, which is like an abandoned
house or cave, and they undergo so many different kinds of suffering. And just
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
95



Likewise, sentient beings
suffer in the abandoned
house that is samsara,
feeling unprotected
despite the Buddha-
nature within
like the poor pregnant woman, they are without protection. And yet right inside
the womb of sentient beings dwells the Buddha-nature that is like a universal
king.
.
1 23
ཇི་ལྟར་བུད་མེད་ལུས་ལ་དྲི་བཅས་གོས་གྱོན་མི་སྡུག་གཟུགས་ལྡན་པ། །
ས་བདག་མངལ་ན་གནས་ཀྱང་མགོན་མེད་ཁང་པར་སྡུག་བསྔལ་མཆོག་མྱོང་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་བདག་རང་ནང་གནས་མགོན་ཡོད་གྱུར་ཀྱང་མགོན་མེད་བློ་ལྡན་པ། །
འགྲོ་བ་ཉོན་མོངས་དབང་གིས་ཡིད་མ་ཞི་བས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་གཞི་ལ་གནས། །
The woman is dressed in dirty clothes, her form unpleasant and in the pauper-home she
must endure the worst of sorrows, even though a ruler dwells within her womb.
Similarly, even though within them they have a protector residing, beings believing
themselves undefended can never find their peace of mind, being by defilement
overpowered - so in the "ground of suffering" they remain.
A ruler of the earth dwells in the womb of a woman has an unpleasant appearance and
whose body is dressed in dirty clothes. Nevertheless she has ſto abide) in a poorhouse
and undergo the experience of direst suffering. Likewise, beings deem themselves
unsheltered though a protector resides within their own {mindst. Thus they have to
abide in the ground of suffering, their minds being unpeaceful under the predominating
drive of the mental poisons.
Like the destitute woman,
we don't realise we have
the protector within us
The woman is not even beautiful, wears ragged clothes and is victimised, without
any protection, even though she's pregnant with the chakravartin. This is such a
beautiful analogy. Especially when taking refuge, we always think that the
protector, lord, god or whatever is somewhere out there. And if you think they're
out there, then you will have all sorts of problems. You feel that you're ignored,
that you're not on the list of protection and stuff like that. The analogy is very
beautiful because the woman feels she's abused, abandoned and living in a very
strange, scary, deserted cave. And all along, there is the real protector, the big
protector, who is not only her protector but everybody's protector. Like this
woman, we sentient beings dwell in samsara not knowing that we are pregnant
with the protector.
Example #9: The Golden Image and the Clay Mould
3244
ཇི་ལྟར་ནང་གི་གསེར་ཞུན་གཟུགས་རྒྱས་པ།
ཞི་བ་ཕྱི་རོལ་ས་ཡི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན། །
མཐོང་ནས་དེ་ཤེས་པ་དག་ནང་གི་གསེར། །
སྦྱང་ཕྱིར་ཕྱི་རོལ་སྒྲིབ་པ་སེལ་བྱེད་ལྟར། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
བྱ6



Upon seeing a complete and peaceful statue, cast in gold yet still its mould, externally
like clay, those who know would remove the outer covering to cleanse the gold that
lies within
An artistically well-designed image of peaceful appearance, which has been cast in gold
and is still) inside fits mould), externally has the nature of clay. Experts, upon seeing
this, will clear away the outer layer and cleanse the gold therein.
(#9) A golden statue
inside a clay mould isn't
affected by the vulgarity
of the mould. Those who
wish to have the statue
will dismantle the mould
The ninth example is a mould that is made out of clay or dirty, impure earth.
Inside this mould lies a statue made of pure gold, completely unstained by the
impurity of the mould. Again, this is a very profound example, because as I was
saying, the mould does not affect the quality or essence of the statue. Of course,
in our ordinary mind, we think that without the mould there is no statue, so we
think that the mould must affect the statue. But the statue is not affected by the
vulgarity of the mould. And knowing that the mould not the statue, those who
wish to have the golden statue will dismantle the mould.
125
རང་བཞིན་འོད་གསལ་དྲི་མེད་རྣམས་ཀྱང་ནི། ། |
གློ་བུར་བར་ནི་རྣམ་པར་གཟིགས་གྱུར་ནས། །
རིན་ཆེན་འབྱུང་གནས་ལྟ་བུའི་འགྲོ་བ་རྣམས། །
སྒྲིབ་པ་དག་ལས་སྦྱོང་མཛད་བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག །
The perfectly-enlightened perfectly see that the nature of mind, clarity, is covered by
transient impurities. Hence from these obscurations they cleanse beings, who are like
mines of precious gems.
Likewise those of supreme enlightenment fully see that there are defilements on the
luminous nature, but that these stains are just adventitious, and purity beings, who are
like jewel mines, from all their veils.
Buddha knows the mould
is temporary, so he
manifests for the sake of
beings, even though he
has never moved from the
original state of
enlightenment
Buddha-nature is primordially pure and completely stainless, but it is wrapped
inside this mould of emotions and obscurations. Buddha knows that these
emotions are temporary. So in order to benefit sentient beings, to dismantle this
mould, although the Buddhas have never moved from the original state of
enlightenment, they manifest as if they have, like Shakyamuni Buddha. This is a
little tricky to translate. And they try to take the Buddha-nature that is like the
golden statue from its source, meaning the mould.
"One hundred emotions,
one hundred wisdoms"
There is a very important remark here, which is especially used by tantric people.
For example, they say "one hundred emotions, one hundred wisdoms". They
even say that emotions are like the source or origin of wisdom. Here Maitreya is
becoming very profound. Until now when we have talked about the identity, the
temporary emotions, the wrapping, we have been thinking that the wrapping
somehow exists independently. But now even the wrapping is dismantled as a
concept of wrapping, because it is the source (jungney) of the statue. The mould
Here we deconstruct the
concept 'wrapping', as we
see it is the source of the
statue
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
97



Despite its impurity, it is
the where the golden
statue dwells
is somehow bad, vulgar and made of impure substances. It is not gold, it is not
pure, and yet this is where the statue dwells.
Rangtongpas would prefer
to say that emotions are
path, but Shentongpas
say emotions are like a
mould from which
Buddha-nature is taken
out
This is a big one! Many Rangtongpa people don't have that courage to say this.
Here we are saying that the emotions are like a mould, and Buddha-nature is like
a statue, and the statue comes from the mould. Many of the Rangtongpas prefer
to say that the mould is like a path, and the path is emotions, so when we refer
to emotions we are referring to the path. But many Shentongpas, and especially
the mahasandhi people, would say without any doubt that all emotions are like a
mould from which Buddha-nature is taken out. It implies that they are the
source of the Buddha-nature. It doesn't mean that Buddha-nature is a
compounded phenomenon. Don't bring that petty logic here - it's just a simple
example. This complements the mahasandhi philosophy so well.
126
ཇི་ལྟར་དྲི་མེད་གསེར་འབར་ལས་བྱས་ས་ཡི་ནང་དུ་ཆུད་གྱུར་གཟུགས། !
ཞི་དེ་རང་བཞིན་མཁས་པས་རིག་ནས་ས་དག་སེལ་བར་བྱེད་པར་ལྟར
།།
དེ་བཞིན་ཀུན་མཁྱེན་དག་པའི་གསེར་འདྲ་ཞི་བའི་ཡིད་ནི་མཁྱེན་གྱུར་ནས། །
ཆོས་འཆད་ཚུལ་གྱིས་བརྡེག་སྤྱད་སྒྲུབ་པས་སྒྲིབ་པ་དག་ནི་སེལ་བར་མཛད
། །
Just as an expert removes all the clay, knowing the nature of the peaceful statue in
bright stainless gold which it contains, so likewise the omniscient know the peace of
mind like the cleansed gold: chipping away, by means of Dharma explanation, they
clean away each and every obscuration.
Recognizing the nature of an image of peaceful appearance, flawless and made from
shimmering gold, while it is still contained in its mould, an experi removes the layers of
clay. Likewise the omniscient know the peaceful mind, which is similar to pure gold,
and remove the obstructions by teaching the Dharma, ljust as the mould) is struck and
chipped away.
Knowing that the statue is
unstained by the mould,
the Buddhas chip away at
the mould and dismantle
it
The solid golden statue that is inside the mould is not stained by any of the
stains of the mould, and a good sculptor with great skill can dismantle the
mould. Likewise, the Buddhas, knowing that this Buddha-nature is like a golden
statue dwelling in the mould of the emotions, will chip away at the mould and
dismantle it with their skills such as turning the wheel of the Dharma.
127
པདྨ་སྲོག་ཆགས་བུང་བ་དང་། །
སྦུན་པ་རང་ནི་མི་གཙང་ས། །
འབྲས་ཤུན་གོས་ཧྲུལ་བུད་མེད་ཀྱི། ། I
ལ་དང་
ང་ས་ཡི་སྦུབས་ན་ཡང་། །
Inside the lotus, the bees, the husk, the filth, the ground, the fruit skin, the tattered rags,
the woman's womb and the clay mould there are
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
98



The lotus, the bees, the husk, the filth, the earth, the skin of the fruit, the lattered rag,
the woman's womb and the shroud of clay fexemplify the defilements),
128
སངས་རྒྱས་སྦྲང་རྩི་སྙིང་པོ་བཞིན། །
གསེར་བཞིན་གཏེར་བཞིན་ལྗོན་པ་བཞིན། །
རིན་ཆེན་སྐུ་དང་འཁོར་ལོ་ཡིས། །
བསྒྱུར་བ་བཉིན་དང་གསེར་གཟུགས་བཞིན། །
the Buddha, the honey, the kernel, the gold, the treasure, the great tree, the precious
image, the universal monarch and the golden figure.
while (the pure nature] is like the Buddha, the honey, the kernel, the gold, the treasure,
the great tree, the precious statue, the universal monarch and the golden image.
Summary of nine
examples: Buddha-nature
exists within sentient
beings, wrapped by
adventitious emotions,
but nevertheless
unaffected by them
Once again there is another summary. The examples of the wrapping are the
ordinary lotus, the bees, the rice husk, the dirty mud or garbage, the ground, the
fruit skin, the ragged clothes, the woman's womb and the clay mould. And
inside these wrappings dwells Buddha, honey, rice, gold, source of treasure, tree,
statue, king, the precious form of the Buddha, and the golden statue. Buddha-
nature exists within sentient beings, and even though it has been wrapped by all
the defilements of the emotions since beginningless time, the emotions are
temporary or adventitious. So the Buddha-nature itself has never been affected
by these wrappings, which are the emotions, since beginningless time.
Day 8 - Introduction
The power of Jamgön
Kongtrül's words
The idea of drima
dralrung, that stains are
removable, is the very
quintessence of the
Buddhist path
Last night, I was reading the commentaries by Asanga and some of the great
masters, including Jamgön Kongtrül, and I realised that even after all this time,
having been a Buddhist for 42 years, I've really ignored the power of the
statements that 'the stain is removable' (drima dralrung), and that 'enlightenment
is possible' (sang jarung). Perhaps we should say 'enlightenable', since whenever
we talk of possible', it brings up 'impossible'. In any case, drima dralrung and
sang jarung are such great words. They have so much meaning, especially when
we say that the stain is removable, that the defilements are temporary,
adventitious. This concept is amazing, and actually this one idea of drima
dralrung, that the stains are removable, it what makes the Buddhist path. It's the
very quintessence of the Buddhist path. It is refuge, bodhicitta, the Vajrasattva
mantra, development meditation and completion meditation - everything is in
there. That aspect is what we are talking about and studying here. I know some
of you are somewhat discouraged or something, because you are hearing
unfamiliar ideas like the "uncompounded single lock of hair" being there already
and all of that. But basically, if you just keep in your head the ideas of draldrey,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
99



the result of elimination, and drima dralrung, that stains are adventitious, then
you'll be OK when you study this.
If the stains were not
removable then prayers
would be a complaint,
and blessings would be
compounded, so they
would be unobtainable
The concepts of supplication, taking refuge, receiving blessings and receiving
abhishekas - everything is based on this drima dralrung, that the stains are
removable. The stains are not you. They are adventitious, temporary. If this
were not the case, then prayers would be a complaint. And blessings and
empowerments would be compounded and changeable. Basically, they would be
unobtainable. Blessings would be like your underwear - sooner or later you
would have to remove them and then change to another pair of underwear, and
then for a moment you would have to become naked, and that's not good, is it?
I'll resist talking about Gérard, although I can understand why he's irresistible,
especially for oversized people like elephants!
The husk, bees and
mould are sophisticated
and strong and they have
been there a long time. If
it were not for drima
dralrung, we might
almost think they were
our nature
You know how we talk about human rights? I think this is the essence of the
rights of all beings, not only humans. This is the essence of beings' rights. I
think if we have a good understanding of this, the inspiration to practice the
Dharma and the seed of diligence and enthusiasm will be planted. Because the
husk, the bees and the mould are very strong and sophisticated, and they have
been there for a long time, so if it were not for the drima dralrung, we might
almost think that they were our nature.
129
སེམས་ཅན་ཁམས་ཀྱི་ཉོན་མོངས་
ངས་སྦུབས། ། 1
མ་འབྲེལ་ཐོག་མ་མེད་པ་ན། །
སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་དྲི་མེད་ནི། །
ཐོག་མ་མེད་པ་ཡིན་པར་བརྗོད། །
Similarly, it is said that the shell of defilements covering the nature of beings is
beginningless and unconnected with it and that the stainlessness of that nature of mind
is beginningless.
It is said that the shroud of the mental poisons, (which causes the veils) of the element
of beings, has had no connection with it since beginningless time, while the nature of
mind, which is devoid of stains, has been present within them since beginningless
time.
130
ཆགས་དང་སྟང་དང་རྨོངས་དང་དེའི། །
ཀུན་སྣང་དྲུག་དང་བག་ཆགས་དང་།
མཐོང་སྒོམ་ལམ་སྤང་མ་དག་དང་།
དག་པའི་ས་ལ་བརྟེན་པ་ཡི། །
Desire, aversion and ignorance, these in their strongly active state or as latent imprints,
that to be abandoned through insight, that to be abandoned through cultivation, the
impurities present in the impure and the impurities present in the pure -
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
100



The nine aspects of defilements: desire, aversion and mental blindness, their fierce
active state, the remaining imprints for unknowing), the defilements to be abandoned on
the paths of seeing and meditation, and the defilements based upon the impure levels
and the pure levels respectively,
131
དྲི་མ་རྣམ་དགུ་པདྨ་ཡི།
སྦུབས་སོགས་དཔེ་ནི་རབ་བསྟན་ཏེ། །
ཉེ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས སྒྲུབས་ཀྱི་ནི། །
དབྱེ་བ་ཕྱེ་
བ་མཐའ་ལས་འདས་ 1
These nine have been illustrated by the examples of the lotus "shell" and so on. The
"shell" of subsidiary defilements divides into infinite categories.
Are fully taught by the shroud of the lotus and the other examples. {When} classified,
the shroud of the secondary poisons is beyond any end.
132
4
ཆགས་སོགས་དྲི་མ་དགུ་པོ་འདི། །
མདོར་བསྡུས་ནས་ནི་གོ་རིམས་བཞིན། ། |
པདྨའི་སྦུབས་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཡི། །
དཔེ་དགུ་དག་གིས་ཡང་དག་བསྟན། །
Summarized briefly, the nine impurities, ciesire and so on, have been well illustrated
through nine examples - the lotus "shell" and so forth respectively.
But when it is comprised concisely, the nine defilements of desire and the other
afflictions are well explained in the given order by the nine similes of the shroud of the
lotus and subsequent examples.
The nine examples are
ordered to correspond to
nine categories of
emotional defilement
We're still continuing with the nine examples. Yesterday someone asked me
whether these nine examples have any order, and here we will see that they do.
Although the emotions that wrap the Buddha-nature are infinite, Maitreya is
going to summarise these emotions into nine categories that correspond to the
nine examples. Then he will gradually explain how these obscurations obscure
the kham or the Buddha-nature. In order, the nine categories are:
(1) to (3) Passion,
aggression and ignorance
in their latent form
(1) to (3) The first three are passion/desire, anger/aggression and ignorance in
their latent form, rather than their obvious form. The latent three poisons are
defilements that are purified by the sublime beings.
(4) The obvious three poisons, which really throw you into samsara. These are
defilements that are purified by non-sublime beings, worldly beings that are
still on the path, by practicing methods such as meditating on ugliness,
impermanence and so forth,
(4) The three poisons in
their obvious form
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
101



(5) Subtle habitual
patterns that produce
mental form
(6) Obscurations to be
abandoned on path of
seeing
(7) Obscurations to be
abandoned on path of
meditation
(5) The very subtle habitual patterns, the obscurations (dripa) that usually
produce mental form, such as the subtle form of the Arhats. This kind of
defilement is purified by the path of the greater enlightened beings.
(6) The obscurations that obstruct beings from seeing the nature of phenomena,
which are what we call the 'obscurations to be abandoned on the path of
seeing' (tongpang).
(7) The obscurations that have to be abandoned by sublime beings on the path
of meditation
(8) The obscurations that exist on the seven lower bhumis, which are to be
purified on the three last bhumis.
(9) The last obscurations are those on three pure bhumis, the three last bhumis,
which have to be abandoned by the vajra-like antidote.
(8) Obscurations on the
seven lower bhumis
(9) Obscurations on the
three final 'pure' bhumis
These nine obscurations are explained by the nine examples.
133
དྲི་འདི་དག་གིས་བྱིས་རྣམས་དང་། །
དགྲ་བཅོམ་སློབ་པ་བློ་ལྡན་རྣམས། །
རིམ་བཞིན་བཞི་དང་གཅིག་དང་ནི། །
གཉིས་དང་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་མ་དག་ཉིད།
The pollutions respectively cause the four impurities of ordinary beings, one of Arhats,
two of beings training in Dharma and two impurities of the wise.
These defilements cause in their given sequence the four impurities of children, the
impurity of Arhats, the two impurities of followers of the path of training, and the two
impurities of those with understanding.
The nine obscurations
correspond to four stages
of the path:
So there are nine obscurations, in the order we have just explained, and they can
be arranged in four categories corresponding to four different stages of the path:
(1) Ordinary beings:
obscurations (1) to (4)
(2) Arhats: obscuration (5)
(3) Bodhisattvas up to the
path of accumulation:
obscurations (6) and (7)
(1) The first category obscures ordinary beings, those that are like infants. This
includes the first four obscurations.
(2) The second category obscures the Arhats on the Shravaka and
Pratyekabuddha paths. This includes the fifth obscuration
(3) The third category obscures Bodhisattvas on the paths of accumulation,
application, seeing and meditation. The sixth and seventh obscurations.
(4) The fourth category obscures Bodhisattvas on the bhumis, including the
seven lower or 'impure' bhumis and the final three 'pure' bhumis. The eighth
and ninth obscurations.
(4) Bodhisattvas on the
bhumis: obscurations (8)
and (9)
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
102



134
ཇི་ལྟར་པདྨ་འདམ་སྐྱེས་དེ། །
མདུན་དུ་གྱུར་ན་ཡིད་དགའ་དང་
། །
ཕྱིས་ནས་དགའ་བ་མེད་འགྱུར་པ། །
འདོད་ཆགས་དགའ་བ་དེ་བ ནོ།
The mind is delighted by the "mud-born" - the lotus but later becomes dismayed - such
is desire's happiness.
When a lotus ljust born from the mud appears to la beholder), it delights his mind. Yet
later it changes and becomes undelightful. The joy born from desire is similar to this.
(1) The lotus is an analogy
for latent passion. It is a
source of joy when fresh
and young, but no longer
when it's old and decayed
These obscurations are now explained extensively, starting with the lotus in the
first analogy. When you see a fresh young lotus, then it is a source of joy. But
when the lotus becomes old and decayed, you don't find joy in it any more.
Likewise, when latent passion becomes obvious, that's like finding joy in a new
lotus. And when the object of the desire is no longer fresh, then the joy also
stops. This is a very good description of how passion drives us! You really can't
get a better example than this!
Love and compassion are
very different from
passion
[Q]{Gérard) That's not love!
[A] Are you sure you're not in love these days?
[Q]{Gérard} With everyone!
[A] Oh, that's a love and compassion kind of love. Actually you're right. The joy
of loving sentient beings is not like this at all, because if the lotus never gets old,
then it's not that kind of passion. It's not like the kind of latent passion that
grows very strongly and then stops when the object no longer interests you.
When there's love and compassion, your interest continues to grow and never
stops.
135
ཇི་ལྟར་སྲོག་ཆགས་སྦྲང་མ་ནི།
1
ཤིན་ཏུ་འཁྲུགས་ཏེ་མདུང་བརྡེག་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཞེ་སྣང་སྐྱེ་བས་ན། །
སྙིང་ལ་སྟག་བསྔལ་སྐྱེད་པར་བྱེད། །
When bees are very irritated, they sting. Likewise, once anger has arisen, to the heart it
brings but suffering.
Bees, when extremely agitated, will fiercely use their stings. Similarly hatred, once
arisen, brings suffering to the heart.
(2) The bees are an
analogy for latent
aggression. When a bee
stings, it harms others
and also itself
In the second analogy of the bees and honey, when the bee stings out of
aggression, it creates a lot of pain not only to others, but also to itself. This is a
really good description of temper and how latent aggression becomes obvious,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
103



and then how you do things that are irrational, which cause pain to others and to
yourself.
.
336
ཇི་ལྟ་འབྲས་སོགས་སྙིང་པོ་ནི། །
ཕྱི་རོལ་སྦྱིན་པས་བསྒྲིབས་པ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་སྙིང་པོའི་དོན་མཐོང་བ།
མ་རིག་སྒོ་ངའི་སྦུབས་ཀྱིས་བསྒྲིབས། །
lust as kernels of rice and other grains are covered outwardly by husks and skins, so
similarly is the vision of the very essence obscured by the "shell" of ignorance.
The kernel of rice and so on is obscured by its outer husk. Likewise the vision of the
(true) meaning is obscured by the eggshell of ignorance.
(3) The husk is an analogy
for latent ignorance. It
completely obscures
what's inside
In the third analogy, the rice seed is completely obscured by the husk, so you
don't see any aspect of the rice inside. Likewise, when emotions obscure you
from seeing the Buddha-nature, that's latent ignorance.
337
ཇི་ལྟར་མི་གཙང་མི་མཐུན་པ། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཆགས་དང་བཅས་རྣམས་ཀྱི།
འདོད་པ་བསྟེན་པའི་རྒྱུ་ཡིན་ཕྱིར། །
ཀུན་ནས་སྣང་བ་མི་གཙང་འདྲ། །
Filth is something unpleasant - like such filth is the active state, causing those who are
involved in gratification to indulge.
Filth is repugnant. Being the cause for those bound up with greed to indulge in sense
pleasures, the active state {of the poisons) resembles it.
( (4) Filth is the analogy for
the three poisons in their
active state
In the fourth analogy, the filth and dirt are something revolting. Likewise, those
who dwell in the desire realm partake or use desirable objects, but this has many
downfalls. It leads to pain and suffering and all that. Therefore the example of
the dirt symbolises the three emotions of passion, aggression and ignorance in
their obvious or active state.
3g
དྲི་ལྟར་ནོར་ནི་བསྒྲིབས་པས་ན། །
མི་ཤེས་གཏེར་མི་ཐོབ་པ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་སྐྱེ་ལ་རང་བྱུང་ཉིད། །
མ་རིག་བག་ཆགས་ས་ཡིས་བསྲྀ
པ་བསྒྲིབས། །
When the wealth was covered, they, not knowing, its treasure could not obtain. In a
similar way the spontaneously-arising is concealed by ignorance's latent traces.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
104



When wealth is hidden, one is ignorant of it and therefore does not obtain the treasure.
Likewise self-sprung (wisdom) is veiled in Arhats by the ground of remaining imprints of
ignorance.
(5) The earth is the
analogy for habitual
patterns that produce
mental form
In the fifth example, the earth obscures the source of the treasure, so the poor
people don't know about it, and therefore they can't enjoy it. Likewise, those
who dwell in the bhumi of bakchak, the habitual patterns that we talked about
earlier, still don't know that the source of endless treasure, which is the Buddha-
nature, exists within these earth-like obscurations.
139
ཇི་ལྟར་སྨྱུག་སོགས་རིམ་སྐྱེ་བས། །
ས་བོན་ཤུན་པ་གཅོད་པ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་དེ་ཉིད་མཐོང་བ་ཡིས། །
མཐོང་སྤང་རྣམས་ནི་བཟློག་པར་འགྱུ
ག་པར་འགྱུར། །
just as the germ and so on split the husk of their grain by their gradual growth, so
insight into thatness dispels likewise "obscurations to be abandoned through insight".
As by gradual growth from bud to shoot the skins of the seed are cut, the vision of
thatness averts (the stains to be abandoned by seeing.
(6) The way the shoot
dismantles the fruit
around it is an analogy for
the Bodhisattva's wisdom
dismantling the emotions
In the sixth example, when a shoot sprouts from within the fruit, and gradually
grows branches and then grows into a tree, it automatically dismantles the shell
or wrapping of the fruit from the inside. Likewise, when the Bodhisattva reaches
the path of seeing, from then on his wisdom grows gradually and this
automatically dismantles the wrapping, the emotions. This is why it is called
tongpang.
140
འཕགས་པའི་ལམ་དང་འབྲེལ་པ་ལས། 1
འཇིག་ཚོགས་སྙིང་པོ་བཅོམ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས། ། !
བསྒོམ་ལམ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྤང་བྱ་རྣམས།
གོས་ཧྲུལ་དག་དང་མཚུངས་པར་བསྟན། །
Those who, through following the path of the realized, have overcome the very pith,
the beliefs that the destructible and multiple could be a self, still have obscurations to
he abandoned through the jñana of the path of cultivation. These have been illustrated
as being like those tattered rags.
Through their junction with the noble path they have overcome the essential part of the
transitory collection. What their wisdom must abandon fon the path of meditation is
explained as being similar to tattered rags.
(7) Ragged clothes are the
analogy for defilements
dismantled on the path of
meditation
A Bodhisattva who has reached the path of seeing gradually dismantles the chief
of all obscurations, which is clinging to things that are destructible. This refers
to how we usually have clinging towards the aggregates, as in the example of the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
105



Ragged clothes fall apart
easily because of the
strength of the antidote
hand that we talked about earlier. This is destructible, but we cling to it as
though it were not. A Bodhisattva who has passed through the path of seeing,
and who is now on the path of meditation will dismantle and purify these kinds
of defilements like ragged clothes. Ragged clothes are very easy to dismantle.
They are not stubborn. Of course, here we are talking about the quality of the
antidote.
ས་བདུན་ལ་བརྟེན་དྲི་མ་ནི། 1
མངལ་སྦྲུབས་དྲི་མ་དག་དང་མཚུངས། །
མངལ་སྦུབས་བྲལ་འདྲ་མི་རྟོག་པའི།
ཡེ་ཤེས་རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པ་བཞིན། །
In the seven deep levels the impurities which remain are comparable to impurities in
the confine of a womb. Release from them is like freedom from that womb whilst non-
conceptual jñana is like finally maturing.
The stains based on the seven (impure levels resemble the defilements of the shrouding
womb. Concept-free primordial wisdom is released, like the mature (prince) from the
womb's confine.
(8) The womb is the
analogy for obscurations
on the seven lower
bhumis
The obscurations that Bodhisattvas have on the seven lower bhumis are womb-
like obscurations. They involve effort, and you still don't see the Buddha-nature
completely. Whereas once you reach the three higher bhumis, then the non-
conceptual wisdom, which is like the chakravartin or universal monarch, will arise
without any effort.
142
ས་གསུམ་རྗེས་འབྲེལ་དྲི་མ་རྣམས།
ས་འདམ་གོས་བཞིན་ཤེས་བྱ་སྟེ། །
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟའི། 1
ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱིས་གཞོམ་བྱ་ཡིན། །
The impurities related to the three deep levels should be known as similar to the traces
of clay. These are those to be eliminated by the vajra-like samadhi of the “Great".
The defilements connected with the three (pure) levels should be known as being
similar to the layer of clay. They must be overcome by the vajra-like samadhi of those)
who are the embodiment of greatness.
(9) The clay mould is the
analogy for obscurations
on the three pure bhumis
The obscurations on the three last bhumis, the three pure bhumis, are like the
clay mould. You don't need a very big effort to break the mould, and for these
weak defilements there is a very strong antidote, the vajra-like antidote.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
106



143
དེ་ལྟར་ཆགས་སོགས་དྲི་མ་དག་
པད་མ་ལ་སོགས་དག་དང་མཚུངས། །
Thus the nine impurities, desire etc., correspond to the lotus and the rest.
Thus desire and the further of the nine detilements correspond to the lotus and the
following examples.
Once again there is a summary: these nine different kinds of defilement
correspond to the nine different kinds of examples.
143 (contd.)
རང་བཞིན་གསུམ་གྱིས་བསྡུས་ཕྱིར་ཁམས། །
སངས་རྒྱུས་སོགས་དང་ཆོས་མཚུངས་སོ། །
The Buddha-nature corresponds to the Buddha and so on being the three natures'
union.
its nature unifying three aspects, the element has properties that correspond to those of
the Buddha and the other similes,
The nine examples also
provide analogies for the
three aspects of the
qualities of Buddha-
nature
We are still continuing with the nine examples. We have been explaining how the
obscurations are symbolised by the nine different kinds of attributes such as
lotus, bees and all of that. Now we are beginning to talk about the Buddha-
nature. Because of the three aspects of the qualities of the Buddha-nature, this
Buddha-nature is therefore symbolised in the nine examples as Buddha, honey
and so forth.
144
འདི་ཡཾ་རང་བཞིན་ཆོས་སྐུརང་
།།
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་དང་རིགས་ཀྱང་སྟེ། །
དེ་ནི་དཔེ་གསུམ་གཅིག་དང་ནི། །
ལྔ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ནི་ཤེས་པར་བྱ། །
Its three natures are the dharmakaya, the suchness and the potential. These should be
understood respectively through the three, one and five examples.
its nature is dharmakaya, suchness and also the disposition. These are to be known by
the {first] three examples, the fourth one and the followingfive.
There are three aspects of
Buddha-nature:
(1) Self-arising wisdom,
the Dharmadhatu,
examples (1) to (3)
(2) Unchanging thatness,
example (4)
The three aspects or natures of the Buddha-nature are explained here. The first
nature of Buddha-nature is self-arising wisdom, the Dharmadhatu. The second
nature of the Buddha-nature is the unchanging thatness. The third is the family
(rig) that becomes the Buddha, or the element (kham) that makes or becomes the
Buddha. And these three natures of the Buddha-nature are explained by the nine
examples. The first three examples explain the dharmakaya, the fourth example
explains the thatness, and the final five examples explain the kham.
(3) Rig or kham, the
Buddha family or element,
examples (5) to (9)
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
107



145
ཆོས་སྐུ་རྣམ་གཉིས་ཤེས་བྱ་སྟེ། །
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ཤིན་ཏུ་དྲི་མེད་དང་། །
དེ་ཡི་རྒྱུ་མཐུན་ཟབ་པ་དང་
། །
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཚུལ་ནི་སྟོན་པའོ། །
The dharmakaya should be known as two: the perfect immaculate Dharmadhatu and
the favourable conditions for this, the teachings in their profound and manifold aspects
The dharmakaya is to be known (in two aspects. These are the utterly unstained
Dharmadhatu and the cause conductive to its {realization), which is teaching in the
deep and manifold way.
We tend to think of
dharmakaya as some kind
of blue Buddha or
formless nothingness
This stanza is very important. All this time we have been talking about the
dharmakaya and the rupakaya, and these will be explained very thoroughly here.
From now on, when you talk about dharmakaya or nirmanakaya, you should
remember the nine examples. Because otherwise, I have the feeling that when
people talk about the dharmakaya, in the worst case they think it's some kind of
blue Buddha in the sky. Or perhaps slightly better, other people think it's some
kind of a nothingness that doesn't have form, colour or shape. Very few think
about it in terms of the universal king in the womb of an ordinary woman, or the
golden statue inside the ordinary mould.
Now we can think of
dharmakaya as a
chakravartin in the womb
of an ordinary woman, or
a golden statue in a
mould
This text is an extensive study of the three or two kayas. The word 'kaya' can be
translated as 'body', which is a very good word. I say this, because when you
receive Mahayana teachings on the dharmakaya, you are almost sure to hear
about emptiness. We talk about emptiness and nothingness, but we tend to
forget the fullness, the kaya, the part about the 'body'! Even in the highest
teachings, the emptiness aspect of the mind is somehow introduced as the
dharmakaya, but it isn't something non-functioning and inanimate. It has the
aspect of kaya, the body, fullness, or mass if you like.
We talk about emptiness,
but forget the aspect of
fullness, the kaya or body
Two categories of
dharmakaya:
(1) 'Primordially pure',
can only be perceived by
self-awareness wisdom
(2) 'Approximate', taught
during the path
There are two categories of dharmakaya. First is the dharmakaya that is
primordially pure, which can only be perceived by self-awareness wisdom. The
word 'perceived' is not so good. Perhaps we should say it is solely the object of
self-awareness wisdom. Second is gyütün, which means 'similar cause'. I think
the word 'approximate' is quite good here. This is the approximate dharmakaya
that is taught during the path, as we are doing right now. Basically, it is our
attempt to talk about the primordially pure dharmakaya, which it is impossible
for us to talk abou And it can be explained in infinitely many ways.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
108



146
འཇིག་རྟེན་འདས་ཕྱིར་འཇིག་རྟེན་ན། 1
འདི་ལ་དཔེ་ནི་མི་དམིགས་པས། །
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ཉིད་དང་ཁམས། །
འདྲ་བ་ཉིད་དུ་བསྟན་པ་ཡིན། །
As it transcends the world, there is no example for it manifest within the world;
therefore it has been represented by corresponding the essence to the tathagata's form.
The dharmakaya) being beyond the worldly, no example for it can be found in the
world. Therefore the element and the Tathagata are explained as being Islightly) similar.
The first kind of
dharmakaya is beyond
concept and expression.
We cannot find an
example to symbolise it,
so we use the Buddha,
example (1)
This stanza is so beautiful. The first kind of dharmakaya is beyond worldly. It is
beyond conception, beyond imagination. When we say something is beyond
imagination' or 'beyond thoughts', I don't think that many people understand
what is meant. It's really something big, not just a Buddhist excuse for not
saying anything! It's not something like saying we can't imagine a tail growing
from George Bush's bottom, because that's kind of imaginable! There are some
examples that I don't really remember, like when certain young people look
through their window and see certain things that give them such extreme joy that
it's unimaginable. We cannot express it! Even in our ordinary experience we
have this kind of unimaginable, and perhaps this can serve as a really poor
example of the sort of beyond worldly we're talking about here. Therefore Lord
Maitreya is saying that because the dharmakaya is beyond worldly, we cannot
find an example to symbolise it, so we use the Buddha. In the analogy of the
lotus and the Buddha, dharmakaya itself is used as the example for the first kind
of dharmakaya, because there is no example.
Dharmakaya itself is used
as the example for the
first kind of dharmakaya,
as there is no example
147
ཕྲ་མོ་ཟབ་མོའི་ཚུལ་བསྟན་ནི། །
སྦྲང་རྩི་རོ་གཅིག་པ་བཞིན་ཏེ། །
རྣམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཚུལ་བསྟན་ནི། །
སྣ་ཚོགས་སྒྲུབ་སྙིང་བཞིན་ཤེས་གྱུ །
The teachings in their aspect subtle and deep should be known as like honey's taste
unique whilst the teachings in their manifold aspect as like grains within their various
husks.
Teaching in the deep and subtle way is like the one single taste of honey, while teaching
through various aspects resembles grain in its variety of husks.
The second kind of
dharmakaya is symbolised
by honey, example (2),
and the many aspects of
teachings by the grain
husks, example (3)
The second kind of dharmakaya, the approximate dharmakaya, is symbolised by
the honey, which is the second of the nine examples. It can be understood and
realised, but it is very difficult. It is very subtle, deep, and vast. After all, the
essence of this dharmakaya is the same as the first dharmakaya. And then all the
different kinds of manifestations such as the twelve branches of teachings are
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
109



symbolised by various kinds of husks and skins of different kinds of grains, as in
the third of the nine examples.
1 48
རང་བཞིན་འགྱུར་བ་མེད་པ་དང་
། །
དགེ་དང་རྣམ་པར་དག་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་འདི་གསེར་གྱི་ནི། །
གཟུགས་དང་མཚུངས་པར་བརྗོད་པ་ཡིན། །
Suchness is said to be similar to the substance of gold because this essence is
immutable, perfectly pure and most noble.
Since the nature is unchanging, full of virtue and utterly pure, suchness is said to
correspond to the shape and colour of gold
The unchanging nature,
which remains pure and
naturally virtuous, is
symbolised by the gold
coin, example (4)
Whether the Buddhas come or not, the nature of the Buddha never changes, even
though there are temporary defilements. The gold coin is used as an example to
symbolize this kham, this Buddha-nature, because even if the gold coin drops in
dirty mud or whatever, it is still gold. It is still pure and naturally virtuous, and if
it is found, it can be used to make rings, ornaments and so on, and beautify the
world.
149
གཏེར་དང་འབྲས་བུའི་ཤིང་བཞིན་དུ། །
རིགས་དེ་རྣམ་གཉིས་ཤེས་བྱ་སྟེ།
1
ཐོག་མེད་རང་བཞིན་གནས་པ་ དང་།
ཡང་དག་བླང་བ་མཆོག་ཉིད་དོ། །
One should know the potential as having aspects two, similar to the treasure and the
tree grown from the fruit: that since beginningless time naturally-present and that
perfected through proper cultivation.
Similar to the treasure and the fruit of a tree, the disposition is to be known in two
aspects, as it has existed (asthe nature since beginningless time and has become
supreme through right cultivation.
The element is also
divided into two
categories:
(1) Spontaneously present
rig that is primordially
pure is symbolised by the
poor man's treasure,
example (5)
Now the rig, the family or element, is explained further by dividing it into two
categories. The first (which is the fifth of the nine examples) is the treasure
beneath the poor man's house, which wasn't hidden there by anyone. It's there
spontaneously, without any effort. The second (which is the sixth of the nine
examples) is the fruit, which has the potential to give birth to a big tree like the
mango, but it requires ploughing and fertilizer and so on. Likewise, there are
two kinds of rig, family or element, very similar to the two kinds of dharmakaya
that we talked about. One is the element that is primordially pure, and the
second one is the element that can be made pure, that has the possibility of
being pure. And that possibility is because the first kind of element is
(2) The element that can
be made pure is
symbolised by examples
(6) to (9). This second
kind of element is the
path
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
110



primordially pure (rangshin neypey rig). It's very important to understand that the
second kind of element is the path.
150
རིགས་འདི་གཉིས་ལས་སངས་
པ་རྒྱས་ཀྱི།
སྐུ་གསུམ་ཐོབ་པར་འདོད་པ་ཡིན། །
དང་པོའི་སྐུ་ནི་དང་པོ་སྟེ། ༈
གཉིས་པ་ཡིས་ནི་ཕྱི་མ་གཉིས། །
From this twofold potential there is achievement of the three kayas of the Buddha: the
first kaya through the former and the other two through the latter.
The attainment of the three kayas of a Buddha is seen to stem from the twofold
disposition. By the tirst aspect there is the first {kayal, through the second there are the
latter two
The origin of the three
kayas:
Now the origin of the three kayas is explained, based on these two elements.
When we talk about three kayas, we have to talk about them sequentially because
we don't have three mouths. Otherwise, we would talk about them
simultaneously. But because there is seemingly an order, we end up thinking
that they're three different things. If you have this kind of deluded mind, the
sutras and shastras might make you think that there are different causes for the
dharmakaya and the other two kayas.
When the first kind of
element is realised (the
primordially pure
element), that is
dharmakaya
In reality, when the primordially pure element is actualised, that is dharmakaya.
And the accomplishment of the second kind of element, that which can be
developed or realised, is usually referred to as the two later kayas, the
sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. This will be taught in just moment, so be
patient for a while!
When the second kind of
element is realised, that is
sambhogakaya and
nirmanakaya
151
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་སྐུ་མཛེས་པ་ནི། །
རིན་ཆེན་སྐུ་འདྲར་ཤེས་བྱ་སྟེ། །
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་ནི་བྱས་མིན་རང། །
ཡོན་ཏན་རིན་ཆེན་གཏེར་ཡིན་ཕྱིར།
The essence-kaya, magnificent, should be known as being similar to the statue made of
precious substance, because that is natural and not-created and it is a treasure of jewel
qualities.
The beautiful svabhavikakaya is like the statue of precious material, since fit exists]
naturally, is not created and is a treasure of gem-like qualities.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
111



152
ཆོས་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་སྲིད་ཆེ་ལྡན་ཕྱིར། །
རྫོགས་ལོངས་འཁོར་ལོས་སྒྱུར་བཞིན་ནོ། །
གཟུགས་བརྙན་གྱི་ནི་རང་བཞིན་ཕྱིར། ?
སྤྲུལ་པ་གསེར་གྱི་གཟུགས་ལྟ་བུ། །
The perfect expression is like the chakravartin, being endowed with the greater
Dharma's majesty. Like the golden image are the emanations having the very nature of
a representation.
Wielding the sublime majesty of the Great Dharma, the sambhogalkaya} resembles the
Chakravartin. Being of the nature of a mere] representation, the nirmanaſkaya) is similar
to the golden image.
The essence kaya, the
svabhavikakaya, is like
the precious statue, as it
is primordially pure and
beautiful
The essence body, the svabhavikakaya that is the essence of the dharmakaya, is
primordially pure and beautiful with all the enlightened qualities. That's why it's
like the precious statue, because it has been there right from the beginning. It's
not newly produced. And like the endless qualities of the dharmakaya, the statue
is like the source of all treasure. This Buddha is adorned with the wealth of
profound and vast teachings, wisdoms and methods. Beings who have the ability
of pure perception can enjoy this endless wealth, and that is symbolised by the
universal monarch.
Beings with pure
perception can enjoy this
endless wealth, like the
universal monarch
The manifestation Buddha
appearing to ordinary
beings is symbolised by
the golden statue
The power of the actualisation of the primordially pure dharmakaya is perceived
to different degrees by different kinds of beings who have different kinds of
defilements. Therefore it is like a reflection that appears to different beings with
different capacities. So the manifestation Buddha that appears to common
beings is symbolised by the golden statue.
153
རང་བྱུང་རྣམས་ཀྱི་དོན་དམ་དེ། །
དད་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་རྟོགས་བྱ་ཡིན། །
ཉི་མའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འོད་འབར་བ། །
མིག་མེད་པས་ནི་མཐོང་བ་མེད། །
This ultimate truth of the spontaneously-born is to be understood through faith alone -
The orb of the sun may shine but it cannot be seen by the blind!
This truth of the Sell-Sprung Ones is to be realized through faith. The orb of the sun
blazes with light, (hut is not seen by the blind.
The ultimate Buddha can
only be realised by
devotion
The self-arising Buddha, the ultimate Buddha or Buddha-nature, can be only
understood and realised by devotion, and not with any other means. This will be
explained. In our limited minds, when we talk about devotion, we immediately
jump to the conclusion that devotion is somehow blind, and that there is
something that we have to believe. But that's a very limited way of thinking. It's
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
112



We tend to think of
devotion as blind, but
Maitreya says our ordinary
crítical mind is blind,
since all our concepts are
extremes, compounded
phenomena, to which we
have a very sharp clinging
very interesting. When Maitreya says that Buddha-nature cannot be understood
by any other means apart from devotion, he's saying that we don't usually think
of our ordinary critical mind as blind. But no matter how critical and
intellectually sharp we are, we always fall into extremes. We are still limited by
words, sentences, and our imagination. Basically, they are all fixations. They are
all compounded phenomena. So that's why this kind of limited mind, even
though it is very sharp from our ordinary point of view, will never understand
Buddha-nature.
Maitreya is saying that
Buddha-nature can only
be understood by a mind
that has gone beyond
extremes, and that is
devotion
When teachers say "don't
think - relax, meditate",
we should not
misunderstand this as
encouraging blind
devotion
So when Maitreya says that this kind of Buddha can be only understood by
devotion and not by any other means, he's saying that this kind of Buddha-
nature cannot be understood by a mind that is limited by extremes, but only by a
mind that has gone beyond extremes. I'm borrowing a here from my father's
teachings. He said that our so-called critical or sharp mind actually has very
sharp clinging, and as long as there is clinging, there is clinging to some thing -
it becomes a thing or entity (ngöpo). Because of your clinging, it becomes an
entity, and hence it is compounded, and changeable. Devotion is actually a mind
that has gone beyond extremes. But you know it's very easy to fall into thinking
that the lamas are forcing us to do things when they say, "Don't think too much
now, just have devotion and do it". But in reality, the more you think, the more
you are going to fall into extremes anyway! So when the lamas say, "Don't think
- relax, meditate, let your mind be free from this clinging and these fixations", it
would be very sad if you interpret it as encouraging blind devotion. And yet,
those who do have what we might call blind devotion somehow end up having
greater profit! They don't think so much, and that's already a benefit! As this
stanza says, even though the sun may be blazing, if you don't have eyes, you
won't see it. Similarly, as long as you don't have devotion, you won't see the
Buddha-nature.
And yet, those with blind
devotion somehow end up
with greater profit! They
think less, and that is
already a benefit
Day 9 - Introduction
We talk of understanding,
experience and
realisation, but gaining
understanding is very
difficult. We have too
little wisdom, because we
have too little merit
In the teachings we hear the lamas talk about understanding (gowa), experience
(nyongwa) and realisation (togpa). Understanding comes first, and at a first
glance, one might think that understanding the Dharma is possible, and certainly
easier than realisation. But gaining understanding is actually very difficult. It's
not only because we have insufficient wisdom. The bigger reason is that we
don't have enough merit. As our merit increases, it's incredible how it changes
our understanding of every word or stanza of the Buddha's teachings - even of
seemingly very common or ordinary teachings. As our merit increases, our
understanding really improves. And this doesn't only apply to the Dharma. In
our mundane world, we talk about how we react to things in terms of our mood
or the situation. But it's actually all about merit. When a person has merit,
As our merit increases,
our understanding
improves
When we talk of our
reactions in terms of
mood or the situation, it's
actually all about merit
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
113



whatever they hear, they will hear it as something pleasant, or at least it won't
upset them.
Even if we do everything
right, things can still go
wrong. Our life is really
controlled by merit
How Nyoshui Khen
Rinpoche would teach
Of course in the ordinary world we believe in saying the right thing at the right
time with the right words and all that, but we don't really have that kind of
absolute control. We could do everything right, but everything could go still
wrong as a result. This just means that our merit is what really controls or
interprets our life. I remember when Nyoshul Khen Rinpoche was teaching us.
Sometimes he would start to teach, and as he was just about to start the actual
text, he would fall silent for a long time. Then he would say, "Nothing seems to
be coming out of my mind, so we had better stop here today. Why don't you
guys do some Vajrasattva mantra and if possible some ganachakra puja, and i'll
come back when the time is right". Then he'd disappear for ten days. And he
would come back in a very good mood and teach, and he would say that
everything was coming fluently and flowing this time. But if we thought about it
carefully, he hadn't really taught anything new. It was the same thing, but the
amazing thing is that after ten days, what we heard actually penetrated us much
more deeply. It was the same thing, nothing new. Merit is an ability or power,
and that is actually when you eliminate weakness. That's power, isn't it? Again,
as we have said many times already, accumulation and purification are really one
but with two different aspects.
After accumulating merit,
the same teachings will
penetrate far more deeply
Accumulation and
purification are one, with
two different aspects
Some people have the
merit to enjoy food, and
others don't
Some people have the merit to enjoy food, and others don't. It's quite amazing
to watch people who have merit to enjoy food. Whatever they eat, even just a
boring sandwich, they eat so well! If you watch them eating, it's a real appetizer
if you don't happen to be in the mood to eat. By contrast, for some other people,
nothing is right. I definitely think we need a lot of merit to understand the
teachings from the sutras and shastras. And I think we do have merit, because
here we are in this age, this time when everybody is fighting for completely
meaningless things, and here we are talking about things like the nine examples!
It's an amazing subject - it has so much merit.
We need merit to
understand the teachings,
and we have it. We are
here discussing the nine
examples as others fight
for meaningless things
Buddha sacrificed his
body for one word of
Dharma. This tells us that
any kind of attachment to
form leads to interference
between us and the
teachings
We hear from the sutras that when the Buddha was a Bodhisattva, he sacrificed
his kingdom for one word of wisdom. He sacrificed his body and his identity.
And we hear that he drove one thousand nails into his body just for one word of
the Dharma, or made one thousand holes in his body and filled them with
mustard seed oil to make butter lamp offerings. For me it's so logical. It tells us
that our attachment to the body or any kind of form always becomes a filter or a
source of interference between the teachings and us. For me it's so logical,
because even in our mundane world, we can meet someone for the first time and
already have an idea about them, for example that they're arrogant. And we're
so fixated on this idea that it influences all our conversations with this person.
Nothing good can come out, even though the other person is telling you
something that's good and right, because you are clinging to your idea, and it
has become a big filter. So for me this whole merit business is very logical.
Even in normal life, our
preconceptions about
others distort our
conversations with them,
and our ability to enjoy
them
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
114



Many of you have
sacrificed things to come
here. This is a form of
accumulating merit
Story of student making
offerings to yoshu Khen
Rinpoche to receive
dzogchen teachings for
which there is no price,
then spending more on
eau de cologne for
himself
Although the teachings coming from my mouth are not worthwhile, all of you
have sacrificed many things to come here - time, money, work, in some cases
your relationship. All of that. I think it's good that you should know this is a
form of accumulating merit. For those of you who have come thousands of miles
just to hear this, I'm sure there is a lot of merit. Nyoshul Khen Rinpoche once
told me a story about someone who requested him to give them the introduction
to the nature of mind, all the usual dzogchen teachings. He said that's fine, but
since it's a very important teaching, it deserves a celebration and it also requires
accumulation of merit, and for that the ganachakra puja is the best, so why don't
you get some tsok substance? The other person asked if ten dollars would be
enough. And Nyoshu! Khen Rinpoche said, of course - whatever you can afford.
There's no price. One million dollars is not enough, and one cent is enough.
And the guy bought about seven dollars' worth of food, and later on, as they
were still walking in the same department store, he bought a perfume or eau de
cologne for himself that cost about forty dollars!
We tend to undervalue the
preciousness of the
Dharma
Story of Khenpo Kunga
Wangchuk, who never
bargains for Dharma
books and statues. For
him, Dharma is priceless
We have a tendency to undervalue the rareness and the preciousness of the
Dharma. I think that the present khenpo of Dzongsar Institute, Khenpo Kunga
Wangchuk, is a really good example of a great Dharma practitioner. When he
goes to Dharma bookshops, the owners are very happy, because he never
negotiates. Similarly, he never bargains for statues and sometimes his
attendants have to go back later without him knowing, to ask the storeowners to
give back the money. Because he gives whatever they ask! His concept is that
Dharma is priceless. It's an offering, so he gives whatever they ask. This is very
admirable, but very difficult to do. I always negotiate! I cannot tolerate it when I
feel I am being cheated or deceived! I once overheard His Holiness the Dalai
Lama saying that he was probably just a cowherd in the distance when Buddha
Shakyamuni was in India, someone who wasn't receiving teachings or anything
like that. He just happened to be nearby, admiring the sight of the serene
gathering of the Buddha and his maroon-robed disciples. This is an amazing
teaching! When you go to places like Sri Lanka or Thailand and see these robed
monks, we call them the supreme object of offering. It's an amazing sight. But
I'm prejudiced. Somehow I don't seem to get that kind of inspiration with
Tibetan and Chinese monks. I cannot understand why. I feel it more with Sri
Lankan and Thai monks, when they come barefoot with their begging bowls and
great humility. It's a great sight. I'm sure that just by having goose bumps, I will
create merit equal to the number of goose bumps that I have!
We create merit even
when being inspired by
the example of monks
barefoot with their
begging bowls
We must learn this, as the
value of Dharma has gone
down. Some people even
try to avoid paying to
attend the teachings
This is a very important lesson to learn, because the value of the Dharma has
really gone down. Some people even try to avoid paying the cost to attend the
teachings as if they were trying to evade tax from the government! I'm saying
these things because we're about to begin a very important stanza. Some people
think it is actually quoted from the sutras, and maha ati people sometimes use
this quotation to introduce rigpa or wisdom.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
115



154
འདི་ལ་བསལ་བྱ་ཅི་ཡང་མེད། །
གཞག་པར་བྱ་བ་ཅུང་ཟད་མེད། །
ཡང་དག་ཉིད་ལ་ཡང་དག་ལྟ། །
ཡང་དག་མཐོང་ན་རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ། །
There is nothing whatever to remove from this, nor the slightest thing thereon to add.
Truly beholding the true nature - when truly seen-complete liberation.
Nothing whatsoever is to be removed. Not the slightest thing is to be added. Truly
looking at truth, truth is seen. When seen, this is complete liberation.
There is nothing to
remove from this' or add
to it. Here Rangtongpas
say 'this' refers to
interdependent reality or
emptiness, and
Shentongpas say this
refers to Buddha-nature
or kham
This stanza has been explained and quoted in so many shastras and texts written
by Indians and Tibetans. Here, the Tibetan word dila means 'this', indicating
some thing - and that is actually the big point here. The Rangtongpas would
refer to dila as 'this interdependence' (tenching dreljung dila), this interdependent
reality or emptiness. Whereas the Shentongpas might refer to it as Buddha-
nature, the kham.
When you realise that this
Buddha-nature is
primordially pure beyond
purifying and adding.
then you are liberated
Anyway, for now, let's use kham, Buddha-nature. Within this Buddha-nature
there is nothing to purify. There are no emotions or faults to purify, and there
are no good, true or enlightened qualities that we have to add. Basically, there is
nothing to reject, and nothing to add or impute. It is primordially pure, right
from the beginning, and this needs to be understood by self-awareness. When
you realise the fact that it is primordially pure beyond purifying and adding, then
you are liberated from all obscurations.
155
རྣམ་དབྱེ་
J་བཅས་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན།
གློ་བུར་དག་གིས་ཁམས་སྟོང་གི། །
རྣམདབྱེ་བྱེད་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཅན༑ །
བླ་མེད་ཆོས་ཀྱིས་སྟོང་མ་ཡིན། །
The Buddha-nature is devoid of any affect - such an intrinsic characteristic would be
completely foreign. Yet it is not devoid of the supreme qualities, whose intrinsic
characteristics are undifferentiable from its domain.
The element is empty of the adventitious įstains), which are featured by their total
separateness. But it is not empty of the matchless properties, which are featured by
their total inseparability.
Buddha-nature doesn't
need to be purified
because defilements are
adventitious.
This stanza is like the Shentongpas' stanza, and it really works with their ideas.
Why doesn't the Buddha-nature have any obscurations to purify or any
enlightened qualities that need to be added? Because, as it says very clearly
here, the temporary defilements can be differentiated from the Buddha-nature.
They can be removed. They are adventitious. This is it. It is not that Buddha-
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
116



This is an important
stanza for Shentongpas,
for two reasons:
1) Buddha-nature is not a
phenomenon, so there is
nothing for it to be empty
of
nature is emptiness. It is because all these temporary defilements can be
removed from the Buddha-nature. In reality, Buddha-nature itself is not even a
phenomenon, so there is nothing for it to be empty of. That's one reason why
this is such an important stanza for Shentongpas. The second one is that the
enlightened qualities cannot be removed from the Buddha-nature, because they
are there primordially. They are not something that you have to add. These are
very important quotations for the Shentongpas, and many Nyingmapas, Kagyupas
and maybe some Sakyapas really treasure this stanza. Today, all the stanzas are
especially important. Of course, this whole text is important, but today we will
hear something really useful for us.
2) Enlightened qualities
cannot be removed from
Buddha-nature, as they
are there primordially
156
སྦྱིན་དང་རྨི་ལམསྒྱུ་བཞིན་དེ དང་དེར། །
ཤེས་བྱ་ཐམས་ཅད་རྣམ་ཀུན་སྟོང་པ་ཞེས། །
གསུངས་ནས་ཡང་འདིར་རྒྱལ་རྣམས་སེམས་ཅན་ལ། །
པ་རྒྱས་སྙིང་པོ་ཡོད་ཅེས་ཅི་སྟེ་གསུངས། ། |
He had taught in various places that every knowable thing is ever void, like a cloud, a
dream or an illusion. Then why did the Buddha declare the essence of Buddhahood to
be there in every sentient being?
{The sutras of the second turning of the wheel of Dharma state in numerous places that
all knowable {phenomenal are in all ways empty like a cloud, a dream or an illusion.
Why is it then that in the sutras of the third turning of the wheel of Dharma) the
Buddha, having said this, declared that Buddha-nature is present within beings?
What is the purpose of
teaching Buddha-nature?
Why did Buddha teach in
the second turning that
all phenomena are
emptiness, and then in
the third turning that all
beings have Buddha-
nature?
Why did Buddha teach
Buddha-nature to
ordinary beings, when
even sublime beings on
the path find it very hard
to understand?
Now there is a question. Why did Buddha teach in the sutras that all phenomena
are like a cloud, unstable, naturally illusory and empty? Why is it that even
though we can experience them, they don't exist like tangible phenomena, but
like a dream? Why can we perceive them, though they are essenceless like a
mirage? Why is all this taught as emptiness in the Madhyamika teachings and the
Prajñaparamita Sutras? And as Mipham Rinpoche's commentary asks, why in this
third turning of the wheel of the Dharma does Buddha say there is a kham, a
Buddha-nature that exists within all sentient beings? Isn't that a contradiction?
And since the Buddha-nature is very difficult to understand even for sublime
beings that are on the path, why is it taught here for beings who are not sublime,
but who are still ordinary beings? What's the purpose of teaching it here?
There is no contradiction
between the second and
third turnings. The third
emphasises the clarity
aspect of Buddha-nature,
but does not indicate that
it truly exists. We must
understand both clarity
and emptiness to talk of
their union
First of all there's no contradiction between the second turning of the wheel of
the Dharma, where Buddha said that everything is emptiness, and the third
turning of the wheel of the Dharma, where Buddha then said that all sentient
beings have Buddha-nature. In the Prajñaparamita sutras of the second turning
of the wheel of the Dharma, Buddha emphasises that everything is not truly
existent. Here when Buddha says there is Buddha-nature, he is not indicating
that Buddha-nature truly exists, but he is emphasising its clarity aspect. When
we talk about the union of clarity and emptiness, it's important that we
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
117



There are five reasons
why Buddha-nature was
taught during the third
turning
understand both aspects, not only the emptiness aspect. Besides, there are five
reasons why Buddha taught Buddha-nature during the third turning of the wheel
of the Dharma, which will now be explained.
157
སེམས་ཞུམ་སེམས་ཅན་དམན་ལ་བརྙས་པ་དང་།
ཡང་དག་མིན་འཛིན་ཡང་དག་ཆོས་ལ་སྐུར། །
བདག་ཅག་ལྷག་པའི་སྐྱོན་ལྔ་གང་དག་ལ། །
ཡོད་པ་དེ་དག་དེ་སྤང་དོན་དུ་གསུངས། །
There are five mistakes: faint-heartedness, contempt for those of lesser ability, to believe
in the false, to speak about the true nature badly and to cherish oneself above all else.
So that those in whom these above were there might rid themselves of them, therefore
was it declared.
With regard to faintheartedness, contempt for inferior beings, perceiving the untrue,
disparaging the true nature and exceeding self-cherishing, he said this to persuade those
who have any of these five to abandon their defects.
Throughout the path, the
most important thing is to
generate enlightened
mind
Generally throughout the Buddha Dharma, and especially in the Mahayana, the
most important thing to do is generate the enlightened mind. This is what all the
Buddhas did right at the beginning. If you read the Bhadrakalpa-sutra, the Sutra
of the Fortunate Aeon (kalpa zangpo), you will hear how in the beginning one
thousand Buddhas generated enlightened mind (semchey). Here we are referring
to the mind that wishes to enlighten oneself and all sentient beings. Although it
may not come from a ritual or a ceremony, it's a promise or pledge that I will
enlighten myself and all sentient beings. For practitioners on the path, this is the
most important thing. For example, when you pray, why does prayer work?
Because of this semchey, this determination, this pledge to help sentient beings.
It's all based on that. So we come to the five reasons:
All practice works
because of this
determination, this pledge
to help beings
The five reasons why
Buddha-nature was
taught:
(1) So Bodhisattvas do not
become discouraged
during the path, and also
to bring joy to the path.
If we know the statue is
inside, then there's joy in
breaking the mould
1. First, if Buddha-nature were not emphasised, then a Bodhisattva on the
path might become discouraged, because the path is long, rough, and
endless. So if we know that Buddha-nature is there within us, like the gold
coin, the statue and all of that, it really gives us so much encouragement.
We know it's possible because Buddha-nature is there. It's within us. And
this also brings joy during the path. If we don't know that the statue is
inside the mould, then there's no joy in breaking the mould. But when we
know, the desire to find the statue inside is so strong that we will not even
notice the process of breaking the mould or generating the enlightened
mind.
(2) If we did not know that
all beings equally possess
Buddha-nature, we might
become proud that we are
Bodhisattvas, which would
become a big obstacle
2. The second reason is that as Bodhisattvas we have to benefit many sentient
beings, all sentient beings. Now if we don't know that Buddha-nature lies
with within everybody, then we might not respect other sentient beings. We
might think that we are great because we are Bodhisattvas, and then
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
118



despise other sentient beings. This would become a big obstacle that
would hinder us in benefiting other beings, so the second reason that
Buddha-nature is taught is to dispel that obstacle.
The third and fourth are
to dispel obstructions to
wisdom or sherab:
(3) imputing that Buddha
qualities truly exist, when
in reality they don't
3. The third and fourth reasons are to dispel the obstacles that obstruct us
from having the wisdom (sherab) that understands the scripture and the
realisation. There are two of these obstacles. The first one is imputing.
Even though there is no Buddha-nature, we impute or imagine its existence
by thinking that all these Buddha qualities like the ushnisha exist. But in
reality, they don't.
(4) Thinking that Buddha
qualities do not exist,
which is like a criticism
4. The fourth reason is to overcome the second obstacle to sherab, namely
thinking that the Buddha qualities do not exist, and that there are no
Buddha qualities within us, which is like some kind of criticism.
(5) If we did not know that
all beings equally possess
Buddha-nature, we might
have more attachment to
ourselves and more
aversion to others
5. The fifth reason is to dispel the obstacle that prevents us understanding
that we and others are equal. If we don't know that Buddha-nature exists
equally within all beings, then we might have more attachment to ourselves,
and more aversion towards others.
These are the five reasons why Buddha-nature is taught, and they will now be
explained in more detail.
158
ཡང་དག་མཐའ་ནི་འདུས་བྱས་ཀྱིས། 1
རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དབེན་པ་སྟེ།
ཉོན་མོངས་ལས་དང་རྣམ་སྨིན་དོན། !
སྦྱིན་ལ་སོགས་པ་བཞིན་དུ་བརྗོད། །
The ultimate true nature is always devoid of any thing compounded: so it is said that
defilements, karma and their full ripening are like a cloud etc.
The final truth is in every respect devoid of anything compounded. The poisons, karma
and their product are said to be like a cloud and so on.
Buddha-nature is
primordially pure from all
compounded phenomena,
including the defilements,
karma and their result.
Therefore all our
emotions are like clouds
Here the Tibetan term yangdak peydak means something like 'absolute purity' or
'the end of purity', and of course, we're referring to Buddha-nature. Buddha-
nature is pure from all kinds of compounded phenomena, right from the
beginning. Therefore, Buddha-nature is free from the three kinds of emotions:
desire, aggression and jealousy. It is free from the emotions of karmic formation
such as virtuous actions and non-virtuous actions. And it is free from the result
emotion, which is more like the five aggregates. This goes back to when we were
talking about how some people say that the form of the Buddha, his body, is the
first noble truth of suffering. So therefore the emotions are like clouds.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
119



159
ཉོན་མོངས་ཟིན་འདྲ་བྱ་བ་ཡིན། ། 1
ལས་ནི་རྨི་ལ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་བཞིན། །
ཉོན་མོངས་ལས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པར་སྨིན། །
ཕུང་པོ་སྒྱུ་མ་སྤྲུལ་པ་བཞིན། །
The defilements are said to be like clouds, karma is likened to the experience in dreams
and the full ripening of karma and defilements – the aggregates – are likened to
conjurations.
The mental poisons are like a cloud. Karma resembles a dream experience. The
skandhas produced by the poisons and karma are similar to an illusion or a deceptive
apparition
Emotions are seemingly
apparent and stubborn,
but they are adventitious
Similarly, we speak of a
'cloudy sky, but the
clouds are never the sky.
They are adventitious
Emotions are like clouds. We are always talking about the same thing again and
again. The nature of beings is primordially pure, and that's why we call it
Buddha-nature. And although emotions are seemingly apparent and seemingly
stubborn, seemingly almost like a second nature, they are never a second nature.
They are like clouds. They are adventitious, and not you. This point is quite
important. In Buddhism we always come to the conclusion that these emotions
and defilements are temporary. When we're looking at a grey cloudy sky, we
might call it a cloudy sky but it's not really a cloudy sky. The clouds are never
the sky. The clouds are temporary or adventitious.
Because emotions are
adventitious, karma is like
a dream, not some kind
of divine force
But we should not despise
this dream, as we still
experience the full range
of emotions during the
dream. That's how karma
works
The next line is very important for our understanding of karma. Because
emotions are temporary, so-called karma or action is like dream. This is very
important because many people think that karma is almost like a substitute for
God. They think it's like one who punishes you, rewards you, and decides your
fate. But it's never like that in Buddhism. Karma is actually like a dream. And in
his dream, Gérard might have all kinds of ecstasy, and I'm sure there's a lot of
panting too! But no matter how much he pants and sweats, it's just a dream.
When we say, "it's just a dream", there's sometimes a connotation that we
despise it, because it's not real, it's just a dream. But it doesn't work like that.
in the dream you go through everything, from the ecstasy of meeting an
elephant, through sadness and missing the elephant, to the agony of not having
one. That's how karma works.
Emotions are temporary,
action is like a dream, and
so the aggregates - the
result of emotions and
action - are like a mirage
The closer we approach
the five aggregates, the
more futile or essenceless
they become
This stanza is a big summary of Buddhism. Emotions are temporary, so action is
like a dream, and therefore the aggregates - the result of emotions and action -
are like a mirage. The five aggregates are like a mirage, because the closer you
approach them, the more futile or essenceless they become. We try so hard to
get close to the elephant! But even if there's an engagement, the exchange of
rings, a marriage ceremony or whatever, the elephant is a mirage, so Gérard will
soon begin to see the tail as a tusk. But he's very smart! He doesn't get too
close. He only wants to look through the window, and he likes to have a little bit
of dirt on the window!
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
120



[Q] {Gérard): If I understand correctly, you are teaching us that elephants are
temporary?
[A] Yes, that's true.
160
སྔར་ནི་དེ་ལྟར་རྣམ་བཞག་ནས།
གླར་ཡང་བླ་མའི་རྒྱུད་འདིར་ནི། །
ཉེས་པ་ལྔ་དག་སྤང་བའི་ཕྱིར། །
ཁམས་ཡོད་ཉིད་ཅེས་བསྟན་པ་ཡིན། ། |
Previously was it thus presented. Then, further to this, the presence, of the Buddha-
nature, was taught ultimately in the "changeless continuity", as here so that these five
faults could be abandoned,
for the time being it was thus expounded. Additionally in the unsurpassable continuity
it was the taught: "The element is present", so that the five evils would be abandoned.
The second turning was
taught to emphasise that
form is emptiness, and
that emotions, karma and
aggregates are like a
mirage. The third turning
was taught to dispel the
five kinds of obstacles
Because of this, and to emphasise this, Buddha taught emptiness in the earlier
turnings of the wheel of the Dharma. For example, in the Prajñaparamita-sutra,
he said form is emptiness, emptiness is form, and everything is like a mirage or a
dream, and so forth. And then after that, in order to dispel the five kinds of
obstacles or downfalls, Buddha taught kham, the Buddha-nature, in the sublime
teachings such as the third turning of the wheel of the Dharma.
161
འདི་ལྟར་དེ་ནི་མ་ཐོས་པར། །
བདག་ལ་བརྙས་པའི་ཉེས་པ་ཡིས། །
སེམས་ནི་ཞུམ་པ་འགའ་ཞིག་ལ། །
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ནི་སྐྱེ་མི་འགྱུར། །
Not learning in this fashion, some people are disheartened, through mistaken self-
contempt, and bodhicitta will not develop in them.
As long as they have not heard this, bodhicitta will not be born in those whose minds
are feeble and fainthearted, stirred by the evil of self-contempt.
If you do not know about
Buddha-nature, you
might despise yourself
and become discouraged
at the thought of
lightening all beings
If you have not heard that we have the Buddha-nature within us, then you might
lose courage. You might despise yourself, thinking how can someone impure
and useless like me achieve enlightenment? Bodhicitta, the wish to enlighten all
sentient beings, will not arise within people who have that kind of
discouragement and despise themselves.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
121



162
གང་ལ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་སྐྱེས་པས།
བདག་ནི་མཆོག་ཅེས་རློམ་པ་ན། །
པ་སྐྱེས་པ་ལ། །
དམན་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་རབ་ཏུ་འཇུག །
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་མ་
Some people, when proud, think, “I am best", because bodhicitta has dawned in them,
and they strongly dwell on the idea that those in whom it has not dawned are inferior.
Having engendered {a little bodhicitta, some proudly imagine: "I am supreme!"
Towards those who have not developed it they are imbued with notions of interiority.
Others might become
arrogant and proud of
being Bodhisattvas,
seeing themselves as
saviours
Others might have the bodhicitta of wishing to enlighten all sentient beings, but
if they don't know that Buddha-nature exists within all sentient beings, they
might become proud of being Bodhisattvas. They might see themselves as some
kind of saviour, and other sentient beings as needing to be saved. Then they
could develop arrogance and despise other sentient beings.
163
དེ་ལྟར་སེམས་པ་དེ་ལ་ནི། །
ཡང་དག་ཤེས་པ་མི་སྐྱེ་བ། །
དེས་ན་ཡང་དག་མིན་འཛིན་ཅིང་། །
ཡང་དག་དོན་ནི་རིག་མི་འགྱུར། །
Right understanding cannot arise in those who think like this and so, since they
misinterpret the true, they will not understand the truth.
in those who entertain such thoughts, true understanding will not arise. They hold the
untrue to be true; and thus will not realize the truth.
If you think others don't
have Buddha-nature but
you then seek to help
them, you are imputing as
you are trying to insert
Buddha-nature within
them. Nobody can do this
I think this stanza is quite easy to understand. If you have the arrogance of
thinking that Buddha-nature does not exist within other beings, you end up
despising them. Imagine that you think you're a Bodhisattva who has Buddha-
nature, and other sentient beings don't have the Buddha-nature, so they require
your help. What are you doing? You are constructing and imputing now, but
you're also contradicting yourself. You don't believe they have the Buddha-
nature. So you are helping them, but helping them to do what? You're helping
them to become enlightened. But that's imputation, because you don't believe
that they have the Buddha-nature, so you have to insert the Buddha inside them.
That's a very big mistake. It's what we call drotagpa, which means 'exaggeration'
or 'imputation'. The Buddhist view is that everybody has the Buddha-nature. It
will not change. No one, no guru, no Buddha can insert it. All they can do is
become some kind of path to enable you to realise that.
If you think others don't
have Buddha-nature, this
is drotagpa, imputation
We all have Buddha-
nature. A teacher or
Buddha can only be a path
to help you realise it
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
122



བཅོས་མ་གློ་བུར་བ་ཉིད་ཕྱིར། །
སེམས་ཅན་སྐྱོན་དེ་ཡང་དག་མིན། !
ཡང་དག་ཉེས་དེ་བདག་མེད་པ།
ཡོན་ཏན་རང་བཞིན་དག་པ་ཡིན།
Beings' defects are not the true, being but a fabrication and accidental. In reality, these
faults are not entities whereas the qualities are naturally pure.
Being artificially produced and adventitious, these faults of beings are not truly
Lexistent). In truth these evils do not exist as self, but exist as the qualities by nature
pure.
Another problem is that
we might act as saviours
if we don't realise that
emotions are adventitious
and not the real nature. If
we think emotions are
real, this is kurdep or
depreciation
These are amazing reasons! Another problem is that you might act as a saviour,
not realising that other people's emotions are removable and not their real
nature. If I think that people's emotions are real, this is called kurdep, which
means 'depreciation'. In the previous example, we were adding something. In
this case, we are taking something away. The first fault is the arrogance of a
Bodhisattva who thinks that you don't have these qualities, so he has to give
them to you. But all the qualities of enlightenment exist within all of us. The
second fault is when a Bodhisattva doesn't realise that defilements are
adventitious, and he says that you have a problem and need to be purified.
It is important to know
this to avoid Buddhism
degenerating, for
example through teachers
who try to control your
life by telling you what to
do, what to add and
remove
It's so important that you hear these words, because although Buddhism is
growing in one way, it could also be degenerating. If you don't know this
information, Buddhist teachers might behave like people who control your life,
which is now happening in many parts of the world. They might start to become
your spiritual and secular leaders, deciding that you shouldn't have some things
and you should have other things. They will tell you what to do, what to add, and
what to remove. Then we might have Buddhist masters imposing laws like
making everyone wear six layers of socks wherever they go, or things like that.
We don't accept that
everyone has Buddha-
nature because the first
thing we see in others is
the adventitious
emotions, which we take
as real. It's like 'emotion
at first sight'!
So why can't we conceive or accept that everybody has the Buddha-nature?
Mipham Rinpoche has a very good explanation. As we have seen, beings have all
these adventitious emotions that are not their nature, but which are nevertheless
a temporary manifestation. The problem is that's the first thing that we see in
others, and so we think, 'that's it, that's what's real', without looking at what's
behind that I would call it 'emotion at first sight'! I could illustrate it, but I don't
want to go through the example of Gérard and his elephant any more! There's
another problem tha arise when you look at on the surface and think
that it's the absolute truth. You might then wonder how can enlightenment or
Buddha-nature coexist with emotion? So then you separate or remove
Buddhahood from normal ignorant sentient beings. This is why we always think
that Buddhahood will come to us later, in some other time or place, after ten
Als if we think surface
emotions are real, we
can't see how
Buddhahood and these
emotions coexist, so we
think that Buddhahood
will only come to us later
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point The Element
123



years of practice or whatever, because we don't understand the nine examples
that we talked about earlier.
165
ཡང་དག་མིན་པའི་ཉེས་འཛིན་ཅིང་། 1
ཡང་དག་ཡོན་ཏན་སྐུར་འདེབས་པ།
བློ་ལྡན་བདག་དང་སེམས་ཅན་ལ།
མཚུངས་མཐོང་བྱམས་པ་ཐོབ་མི་འགྱུར། །
one clings to the faults, the untrue, and disparages the qualities, the true, one will not
have the loving kindness of the wise, which sees the similarity of others and oneself.
While they hold the evils, which are untrue to be true) and disparage the true qualities,
denying their presence, even those of understanding will not attain the love that
perceives the similarity of oneself and others.
If you don't know that all
beings have Buddha-
nature, you won't have
loving kindness, as this is
based on everybody being
equal. Otherwise it's only
condescension or pity
This stanza is really beautiful. When you don't know that all beings have
Buddha-nature, then you will not have loving-kindness. Loving-kindness has to
be based on the fact that everybody is equal. As long as you think that the one
who gives love is 'higher in some hierarchical sense, and the poor needy beings
that receive it are somehow 'lower', then there is no love and kindness. It's more
like condescension or pity. And this equality is based on knowing that everybody
has the Buddha-nature. Now Maitreya is coming towards the end of the chapter,
so he's basically giving us everything!
166
འདི་ལྟར དེ་ནི་ཐོས་པ་ལས། །
སྒྲོ་དང་སྟོན་པ་བཞིན་དུས་ན
ཤེས་རབ་ཡེ་ཤེས་བྱམས་ཆེན་སྐྱེ། །
Through learning in such fashion there will arise enthusiasm, respect, as towards the
Buddha, prajña, jñana and great love.
Once one has heard this, joy will be born. Respect as towards the Buddha, analytical
wisdom, primordial wisdom and great love will arise.
The benefits of hearing
about Buddha-nature.
Five qualities are attained:
(1) Joy and enthusiasm for
the path, as we know
Buddha-nature is possible
(2) Respect for all beings,
knowing they have
Buddha-nature and are
worthy of homage
Now we come to the benefit of hearing about Buddha-nature. When we hear
about Buddha-nature, we will have joy or enthusiasm towards the path, because
we know that the Buddha is possible. Even a dog is worthy of homage, because
it has Buddha-nature. Even a dog deserves homage, although perhaps 'deserves'
is not the right word, as it might sound like a gift. Even a dog is worthy of
homage. No matter how many emotions you have erupting inside you, you'll
know that they are removable, and that is wisdom. And at the same time you will
know that all the qualities of the Buddha are within you, and that is primordial
wisdom. So now when you hear about, read about, or see amazing Buddha
qualities according to your projection, you won't treat them as separate from you
(3) Wisdom, prajña, by
knowing that all
defilements are
removable
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
124



(4) Primordial wisdom.
jñana, by knowing that
you already possess all
the qualities of the
Buddha
by thinking, 'well that's them, but I'm different'. You will not think like that,
because you know that all the qualities of the Buddha, down to every single lock
of hair, exist within you. There is nothing to be jealous of or covet, because you
have everything. And when you know that everybody has the Buddha-nature,
loving-kindness will grow. Can you see that emptiness alone doesn't allow you
to do these things? I'm sure by now everyone has converted from the
Madhyamika to the Uttaratantra!
(5) Loving kindness
towards alt sentient
beings
Emptiness alone doesn't
allow you to do all this!
Because of Buddha-
nature, there is no more
inferiority or superiority
complex. You won't look
down with arrogance on
those below you, nor feel
inferior to beings with
great attainment, as you
know that you have no
more and no less than
Shakyamuni Buddha
So what is the effect of knowing that you have these great qualities? If you have
confidence, then negativity, literally 'the unutterable negative actions', cannot
easily overcome you. You become a stranger to negativity, and a stranger has
some kind of dignity. When you're a stranger, others don't have access to you.
They don't come and feel at home with you, because you're courageous. The
second effect of knowing that you have Buddha-nature is that you will not look
down on those who are destitute and think that they are lower than you. You
won't have arrogance, and nor will you feel inferior when you see a sublime
being, someone who has attained a lot. There's no reason to feel inferior,
because you have everything that he has. You have no more and no less than
Shakyamuni Buddha or any of a thousand Buddhas. Basically, there's no
inferiority or superiority complex any longer, because of Buddha-nature. By now
you should all be followers of the Uttaratantral
167
ཆོས་ལྔ་སྟེ་ཕྱིར་དེ་ལས་ནི། །
ཁ་ན་མ་ཐོ་མེད་མཚུངས་ལྟ། །
སྐྱོན་མེད་ཡོན་ཏན་ལྡན་པ་དང་། །
བདག་དང་སེམས་ཅན་མཚུངས་བྱམས་ལས། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད་ནི་མྱུར་དུ་འཐོབ། T
Due to the growth of these five qualities, the unwholesome aspects will be absent and
the similarity will be seen. Through faultlessness, inherent qualities and through loving
kindness, which sees oneself and others' similarity, Buddhahood will be swiftly
achieved.
Through the arising of these tive qualities, one is rid of the faults and sees similarity. [By
realizing the absence of defects and the presence of qualities, and through love,
seeing the equality of oneself and fall beings, Buddhahood will be quickly attained.
You will not be put off by
negativities, as you know
they do not truly exist
You will not become
excited as small signs of
enlightened qualities
arise, as you know you
already have them - what
is there to be excited
about?
When negativities arise, you will know that they are not truly existent. When
good things like small signs of enlightened qualities arise, you will not get
excited, because you already have them. What is there to be excited about? And
then there is loving kindness. With all these, you will attain enlightenment
swiftly. And that is the end of the first chapter.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
125



ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་རིགས་རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་བ་ལས། །
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོའི་སྐབས་ཏེ་དང་པོའོ།། །།
This was the first chapter, on the "Essence of the Tathagatas", from the analysis of the
"Potential for the Rare and Suprene” in the Ultimate Explanatory Mahayana Teaching
on the Changeless Continuity.
This was the section "Tathagatagarbha", the first chapter of The Commentary on the
Highest Continuity of the Mahayana Dharma that Analyzes the Disposition of the Rare
and the Sublime Ones.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
136



Chapter 2
The Fifth Vajra Point - Enlightenment
We can understand
enlightenment simply as
freedom from fixation,
obsession and paranoia
We might practice yoga or
aromatherapy to remove
our gross paranoia, but
most of us don't want to
get rid of all our paranoia
According to Buddhism, as we have already seen, enlightenment can be
understood simply as freedom from fixation, freedom from obsessions, and
freedom from paranoia. But understanding paranoia and understanding the
absence of paranoia are very different. You might be following an alternative
path, like yoga or aromatherapy or whatever, as a means of getting rid of your
paranoia. Most of us are only interested in getting rid of the really gross kinds of
paranoia that we don't feel comfortable with. In general, I don't believe that
worldly beings like us really want to get rid of all our paranoia, because what we
call 'living' is paranoia! It's a system that we need and like. If there were no
paranoia, then the whole business world would collapse, the political system
would collapse, everything. And not many of us have the courage or wish to
transcend this paranoia. Our so-called common sense, the so-called rational
world is actually a very subtle form of paranoia. It's paranoia that isn't too
obvious or too uncomfortable.
Our idea of 'living', our
so-called 'common sense'
is actually subtle paranoia
that isn't too obvious or
uncomfortable
Someone who really
wishes to attain
enlightenment must go
beyond ail references,
whereas most of us are
just looking for a better
life! We don't want to get
rid of all our references!
As we discussed yesterday, someone who really wishes to achieve enlightenment
must have the courage to think in terms of going beyond all references, including
time, space, and everything that is emotional. Most of the time, when we talk
about enlightenment, we are just talking about having a better life! But as we
discussed yesterday, if you really achieved enlightenment, you would no longer
enjoy a suspense film or the next World Cup. The sort of enlightenment that we
normally long for is a bit like a long weekend, or paid leave! We don't want to
get rid of all our references.
The previous chapter
covered kham and rig.
Ground enlightenment is
already there
In any case, enlightenment is the subject of the next chapter. We are just going
to start it today, and those who are interested can come back next year, although
I'm not claiming that you will receive enlightenment next year, only that I will
continue the enlightenment chapter! In the chapter that we have just completed,
we covered quite extensively the kham, the rig, the family or the element, which
is our true nature.
The problem is that we
don't know this, so we
have the concept of
discovery', as if finding
something new even
though it has always been
there. This 'discovery' is
the subject of this chapter
So basically the ground enlightenment is already there. The source of endless
treasure is beneath our bed, but the problem is that we don't know this. So
because we don't know, we have the concept of 'discovery', as if have found
something that wasn't there before. In reality it's not as though it has appeared
as a new phenomenon. It has always been there, and now we are discovering it.
And that is what is explained in this chapter.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
127



368
དག་ཐོབ་བྲལ་བ་རང་
ང་བཞིན་དོན། །
དེ་བརྟེན་ཟབ་དང་རྒྱ་ཆེ་དང་། །
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོ་དེ་ཡང་ནི། །
ཇི་སྤྱིད་དུས་དང་ཇི་ལྟ་ཉིད། །
Purity, achievement, freedom, value for oneself and others, basis, depth, vastness and
greatness of nature, their duration and "how-it-isness"
With its purity, attainment, freedom, benefit for oneself and others, (their) basis, depth,
vastness and greatness of nature, duration and suchness fit has eight qualities).
69
ངོ་བོ་རྒྱུ་དང་འབྲས་བུ་དང་། །
ལས་དང་ལྡན་ལ་འཇུག་པ་དང་། །
དེ་རྟག་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ས་ནི་རྣམ་པར་གཞག །
Present the state of Buddhahood according to its nature, cause, fruit, function,
endowments, manifestation, permanence and inconceivability.
By the topics essence, cause, fruit, function, endowment, manifestation, permanence
and inconceivability, the level of a Buddha is presented.
༣Y()
རང་བཞིན་འོད་གསལ་ཞེས་བརྗོད་གང་ཡིན་ཉི་དང་མཁའ་བཞིན་གློ་བུར་གྱི། །
ཉོན་མོངས་ཤེས་བྱའི་ན་ཚིག་ས་སྟག་པོའི་སློབ་བ་ཡིས་ནི་བསྒྲིབས་གྱུར་པ། །
དྲི་མེད་སངས་རྒྱས་ཡོན་ཏན་ཀུན་ལྡན་རྟག་བརྟན་གཡུང་དྲུང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད། །
དེ་ནི་ཆོས་ལ་མི་རྟོག་རྣམ་འབྱེད་ཡེ་ཤེས་དག་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་འཐོབ། །
That which has been described by "its nature is lucid clarity" is like the sun and the sky,
obscured by the thick veils of those multitudes of "clouds" - defilements and cognitive
impediments – which are but accidents. Buddhahood has no stain, is endowed with
Buddha-qualities, is permanent, everlasting and without change. Its achievement
depends upon non-conceptual and analytical jñana regarding all phenomena.
{Enlightenment, of which the Buddha said: "It is by nature clear light", is similar to the
sun and space. It is free from the stains of the adventitious poisons and hindrances to
knowledge, the veils of which obscured it like a dense sea of clouds. Buddhahood is
permanent, steadfast and immutable, possessing all the unpolluted Buddha qualities. It
is attained on the basis of two primordial wisdoms: (one is free from ideation with
regard to phenomena, the other) is discriminative.
The importance of the
view in Buddhism:
The method or form may
be beautiful or inspiring.
but it is meaningless
without the view. All
religions have similar
methods, such as love
and compassion, but they
have different views
The chapter begins with a summary. Enlightenment is primordially pure (dakpa).
This is the view. In any spiritual path, the fundamental view is so important. The
method, the form of the path, can be very beautiful and inspiring and all that, but
if the fundamental view is not right, the method doesn't mean anything. After
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
128



The view is what makes
the difference, and it also
distinguishes the kind of
motivation you have
For example, people may
avoid goose liver out of
vanity, for health reasons
or out of compassion.
Their actions may be
similar, but their view is
different
all, in general all religions have similar kinds of methods. Everybody talks about
love, compassion, some kind of heaven, the divine, and things like that. But it is
the view that really makes the difference, and the view also distinguishes the
kind of motivation you have. Imagine two people who are both on a diet, one for
the sake of vanity, and the other for sake of their health. They have different
views, as fundamentally one is interested in dieting for health reasons and the
other because of their looks, even though their actions are similar, like avoiding
goose liver. And someone else might avoid goose liver out of a view that is
based more on compassion. So according to the Buddha's path, someone trying
to avoid goose liver based on the view of compassion is an object of homage.
But a Parisian girl who is avoiding goose liver because she is trying to lose weight
in order to look beautiful is not necessarily an object of homage. This is because
she has a different view, even though her action is exactly the same.
Someone who avoids
goose liver out of
compassion is an object
of homage, but someone
who does the same thing
just to look good isn't
necessarily an object of
homage. Their view is
different
The fundamental view in
the Uttaratantra is that all
beings have Buddha-
nature. Practicing
generosity based on the
view that we're all equally
enlightened is very
different from practicing
it with the view that we're
all fundamentally bad
The view is the idea that determines everything else. For example in the
Uttaratantra, the fundamental view is that everybody has the Buddha-nature. So
as we saw yesterday, nobody should feel superior and nobody should feel
inferior, and so on. They are all equally enlightened fundamentally. And based
on that view, if you now practice generosity or patience, then it's very different
from practicing generosity, charity or patience based on the view that we're all
fundamentally bad or wrong. The view really makes a big difference.
The eight points that
explain enlightenment:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Essence
Cause
Result
Action
Possessor
Entering
Unchanging
Inexpressible
So we illustrate the first quality of enlightenment with the first word,
*primordially pure' (dakpa), which designates the view or the essence. Next is the
method to actualise or realise that view, tobpa, which means 'obtaining' or
method'. Then is the result, which is what happens when you realise that view.
The result is that defilements are removed, which is dralwey dreybu. And then
'self' or 'concerning oneself' (rang). This refers to the fact that an enlightened
being purifies all defilements, so all the flaws of the emotions are gone, and the
wealth of stainlessness is obtained for oneself. The fact that an enlightened
being has purified the obscurations to omniscience, and has therefore obtained
the omniscience that is not obstructed from anything and not stuck with
anything, that is what we call zhen. This is the perfection concerning others.
How these eight points
relate to the three kayas
The three kayas will never
cease to exist, which is
unchanging, permanent.
And their suchness
cannot be understood
except by the Buddha's
wisdom
Next there is the 'container' or 'possessor' (denpa) in which all these qualities are
contained. Next is that the enlightened quality is very profound and deep (zapa),
and cannot be comprehended by ordinary thoughts. It is the dharmakaya
(chöku). At the same time, the enlightened qualities are infinite (gyachey) and
they manifest to different beings. There are all kinds of infinite qualities that will
benefit different sentient beings, and that is the vast sambhogakaya. The infinite
quality that is inseparable from the dharmakaya is the vast sambhogakaya
(longku). And these two qualities, the sambhogakaya and the dharmakaya,
manifest to different beings in different forms according to their needs. And that
is the nirmanakaya (tulpeyku). These three kayas will never cease to exist, and
that is the unchanging, permanent. The suchness of these three kayas cannot be
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
129



understood by anything other than the Buddha's wisdom. So these eight points
that explain what enlightenment is - essence, cause, result, action, possessor,
entering, unchanging, and inexpressible - will now be thoroughly explained.
Buddha-nature is never
separated from Buddha
qualities: that is
immutability
We refer to Buddha-nature as follows: "the nature of the mind, luminosity and
clarity from beginningless time". That is like the wisdom, the awareness that is
like the sun. As its nature, that Buddha quality has never been stained right from
the beginning, therefore it is the perfection of purity, which is symbolised by the
sky. That Buddha-nature, temporarily obscured by emotions and obscurations,
is like a cloud. But in reality, that Buddha-nature is never even for a moment
separate from all the Buddha qualities such as the ten rs. It hasn't changed
at all, and that is immutability. So how do we achieve this kind of state? By
focussing on the reality of phenomena, and having the primordial wisdom that
does not dwell on phenomena. And also by having the wisdom to understand
phenomena however and as many as they exist. With these two wisdoms, one
will obtain Buddhahood.
With the two wisdoms,
one will obtain
Buddhahood
171
སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད་ནི་དབྱེར་མེད་པ། །
དག་པའི་ཆོས་ཀྱིས་རབ་ཕྱེ་བ། ། 1
ཉི་མ་མཁའ་བཞིན་ཡེ་ཤེས་དང་། །
སྤངས་པ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་དོ། ། 1
Buddhahood is indivisible yet one can categorize according to its qualities of purity; the
two qualities of jñana and freedom - comparable to the sun and to the sky.
Buddhahood is indivisible, yet can be divided according to its property of twofold)
purity. [Thus it has two features, which are abandonment and primordial wisdom,
similar to peace and the sun.
Two kinds of purity:
having all enlightened
qualities, and not having
any defilements. These
are symbolised by sun
and sky
Now this will be explained again. The absolute Buddha is never separate from all
the enlightened qualities. The absolute Buddha is never stained by temporary
defilements. This is what we call the two kinds of purity: the purity of having all
the enlightened qualities, and the purity of not having any defilement. Having
the purity of the all the enlightened qualities is symbolised by the sun, and the
purity of primordially not having any defilements is symbolised by the sky. So
basically this is the Buddha. Who is Buddha? Buddha is someone or something
that has two qualities - the purity of all the enlightened qualities, which is
wisdom, and the purity of never having been corrupted by any temporary stain.
This is the Buddha, the perfection of elimination.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
130



172
འོད་གསལ་བྱས་མིན་དབྱེར་མེད་པར། །
འཇུག་ཅན་གང་གཱའི་ཀླུང་གི་ནི། །
རྡུལ་ལས་འདས་ཕྱིར་
ར་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི། །
ཆོས་རྣམས་ཀུན་དང་ལྡན་པ་ཉིད། །
This lucid clarity is uncreated. It is that which pervades without any differentiation,
having all Buddhahood's qualities, far greater in number than the sand grains in the
river Ganges.
Luminous clear light is not created. It is indivisibly manifest (in the nature of beings, and
holds all the Buddha properties outnumbering the grains of sand in the river Ganges.
The enlightened qualities
are emptiness and clarity
inseparable. This is the
perfection of realisation
The enlightened quality is naturally luminous. The stainless quality or
stainlessless is primordially pure, and that luminosity is not compounded or
created with any new causes and conditions. This space (ying) and clarity (ösel).
the emptiness and clarity, are inseparable. They function inseparably. The
enlightened qualities are like the sands of the Ganges river, even greater in
number than the grains of sand in the Ganges river, meaning infinite. These
infinite qualities have always been spontaneously accomplished, and they have
never been separate from the Buddha-nature.
173
རང་བཞིན་གྱིས་ནི་
ན་གྱིས་ནི་མ་གྲུབ་དང་། 1
ཁྱབ་དང་གློ་བུར་བ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས། ། 1
ཉོན་མོངས་ཤེས་བྱའི་སྒྲིབ་པ་དེར། །
སྤྲིན་དང་འདྲ་བར་བརྗོད་པ་ཡིན། །
The defilement and cognitive veils are said to be like covering clouds since they are, by
nature, non-existent, they spread everywhere and are but accidents.
By nature not existent, pervasive and adventitious, the veils of the poisons and of the
hindrances to knowledge are described as being similar to a cloud.
The perfection of
purification: adventitious
defilements are cloud-
like, as they do not exist,
and they are removable
The previous stanza explained the perfection of realisation, and this one explains
the perfection of purification. First of all, when we talk about purification, we are
talking about defilements that need to be purified. The temporary or
adventitious defilements are not naturally or truly existent. Yet they are all-
pervasive during the impure or defiled time, although they are removable. And
these removable temporary defilements, which are the emotions and
obscurations to omniscience, obscure sentient beings like a cloud. That's why
they are referred to as being like a cloud.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
131



སྒྲིབ་པ་གཉིས་དང་བྲལ་བ་ཡི། །
རྒྱུ་ནི་ཡེ་ཤེས་གཉིས་ཡིན་ཏེ། །
མི་རྟོག་པ་དང་དེ་ཡི་ནི། །
རྗེས་ཐོབ་དེ་ནི་ཡེ་ཤེས་འདོད། !
The causes of freedom from these two veils are the two jñanas, considered as being the
non-conceptual jñana.
Twofold wisdom causes release from the two veils. Since there is the one that is free
from ideation and the one ensuing from this in post-meditation, it is held that there are
{twol primordial wisdoms.
The two kinds of wisdom
are the antidote to the
two kinds of obscuration
The antidotes to remove these two kinds of obscurations, namely emotions and
the obscurations to omniscience, are the two kinds of wisdom. These are the
non-conceptual wisdom which understands the nature of things, and the wisdom
that understands phenomena however and as many as they exist. We'll have to
stop here. We are about to start a new thread, and if we continued we would
have to end it, which would mean you would have to stay here for another two
days! So we'll stop here for this year, as if we continue, it will really open some
big doors!
End of 2003 teachings
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2003
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
132



2004 Teachings
The Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment (continued)
Day 1
Introduction
We should listen with the
motivation of
enlightening all beings
It is so difficult to talk
about enlightenment, as
we always end up talking
about a person or a state.
But shunyata is ground,
path and result
I should teach this and you should listen to this with the intention of enlightening
all sentient beings. And that enlightenment that we are aspiring to achieve is
what will be taught here, especially in this part of the Uttaratantra-shastra. It's
very vast, so I know that I won't do it justice. It's very difficult for us talk about
enlightenment, because we have a very limited approach. For instance, when we
talk about enlightenment, we end up thinking about an enlightened person or
some kind of state that we should all aim at. These things make it difficult,
because the shunyata that is explained by the Madhyamika masters like
Nagarjuna and Aryadeva is the path, the ground and the result.
When we talk about
enlightenment, we want
to know about the
enlightened being's
qualities and behaviour
Last year we talked about Buddha-nature with very extensive and detailed
examples. And from these we know that Buddha-nature is within every being
and it is all-pervasive. Every sentient being has Buddha-nature. And when we
talk about Buddha-nature, we are talking about enlightenment. When we talk
about enlightenment, we like to hear about the enlightened being's qualities.
What does he look like? How does he talk? Does he sleep or not? This is a very
limited and obscure way of trying to understand enlightenment and enlightened
beings. But it's understandable, because we need to begin somehow. And
actually there are detailed characteristics of how enlightened beings look, such
as the 32 major marks.
The insatiable beauty of
the enlightened being's
form
When we talk about these qualities, we are always made to understand that they
are all beautiful. It has to be like this! We can't really say enlightenment
comprises endless ugly qualities, so all the enlightened qualities have to be very
attractive and wholesome. There's a Tibetan word that means 'insatiable beauty'
(tawey nyingmong), something that's so beautiful that you cannot look at it
enough. You will not get tired of it, unlike the beauties that we have normally in
our mundane world, which we soon tire of and then long for another look or
fashion. But you won't get bored looking at an enlightened being's physical
qualities. Even after thousands of aeons, you won't have had enough of this one
characteristic of an enlightened being.
The enlightened being's
physical characteristics
cannot be perceived, and
this is considered beauty
There are also concepts like tawey mi-ngönpa, which means that the enlightened
being's physical characteristics, especially important ones like the ushnisha, are
not perceivable. And that imperceptibility is considered to be beauty or
wholesomeness, something good rather than bad. Now all this tells us
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
133



The enlightened being's
qualities are not ordinary.
They are dra/wey dreybu,
then result of elimination
something, namely that the enlightened being's qualities are not ordinary. Now
when I say "not ordinary", of course there will be blindly devoted people, just like
other people who follow a theistic path, who could say that the Buddha must
have an incredible look, an incredible quality. But here we are trying to study this
subject in a way that's slightly beyond that, in fact quite a lot beyond that, and
not just with blind acceptance. So it will help our understanding when we
approach this by understanding the concept of the result of elimination' (dralwey
dreybu or draldrey). When we talk about the result of elimination, there are two
kinds:
There are two kinds of
result of elimination:
1) The 'primordially
eliminated result', which
is that our Buddha-nature
has no defilements.
(1) The first is that in reality, our nature - our Buddha-nature - does not have any
of these negative aspects. In reality, the sky does not have clouds. Clouds are
different from sky. So we are talking about something like a 'primordially
eliminated result'. I don't think that words like 'elimination' are particularly
good, but we have no choice. As soon as we talk about elimination, we are
talking about someone pushing, pulling, digging or something like that.
Whereas right from the beginning, the sky is not cloud. It doesn't come with
clouds as part of its attribute or character.
2) The result of
eliminating adventitious
defilements
(2) The second is the result of eliminating adventitious or temporary removable
negative qualities (lobur gyi drima). The first result of elimination is that the sky
has no clouds primordially, right from the beginning. The second is that
sometimes there are clouds, even though they are not part of the sky, and when
the clouds go away we can enjoy the sky. Somehow there is a relationship.
These two correspond to
two kinds of Dharma: the
Dharma of transmission,
and the Dharma of
realisation
It's because of this that we talk about two kinds of Dharma, the Dharma of
transmission and the Dharma of realisation. What we are doing right now is not
considered the ultimate Dharma, because everything we are saying is something
like "If you want to see the sky, you should clear away the clouds". The moment
you say this there's a bit of a contradiction, because sky is not cloud. But for
ignorant beings like us, we are sort of beginning with the clouds, even though
they are not the primordial nature. So somehow you have to start by saying that
if you want to see the sky, you have to clear away the clouds.
What we are doing now is
not the ultimate Dharma
Although the two kinds of
elimination are one, in
one case we talk about
clearing the clouds, and
in the other we don't
There are two kinds of elimination, primordially eliminated and eliminating
temporary defilements, but in reality they are one. The sky that has never been
cloud and the sky that has recently been cleared of clouds - they are the same.
But there is a difference, because in one case there were clouds, but in the other
we are not even talking about clouds or no clouds. When we talk about the sky,
we are not talking about clouds or no clouds. But when we talk about the clouds,
then we talk about eliminating the clouds. So there are two kinds of elimination,
as you can see.
We are studying the result
of elimination
And this result of elimination is the kind of result that we are trying to study. I
am telling you this, because as we go through the stanzas, you will hear words
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
134



We will hear words like
'unchanging' and
permanent', which sound
non-Buddhist. But they
work if you remember the
result of elimination
like 'unchanging' and 'permanent', which might sound very non-Buddhist, let's
say! So just keep in your head this concept of the result of elimination and the
two kinds of elimination. As long as you have that in your head, I think that all
these details like permanent and uncompounded will work. Because now we will
be talking about enlightenment (changchub). And as before, there will first be a
general summary, then a more extended summary, and then the detailed
explanation - so it will be repeated.
Enlightenment is explained with an example in stanza 175.
175
དྲི་མེད་ཆུ་ལྡན་རིམ་རྒྱས་པདྨས་ཁེབས་པའི་མཚོ་བཞིན་དང་། །
སྒྲ་གཅན་ཁ་ནས་ཐར་བའི་ཟླ་བ་ཉ་བ་ལྟ་བུ་དང་། །
སྤྲིན་ཚོགས་ཉོན་མོངས་དག་ལས་གྲོལ་བའི་ཉི་མ་ལྟ་བུར་ནི། །
དྲི་མེད་ཡོན་ཏན་ལྡན་ཕྱིར་འོད་ཟེར་སྣང་ལྡན་དེ་ཉིད་དོ། །
Like a lake of purest water gradually overspread by lotuses, Like the full moon set free
from Rahu's mouth, and like the sun liberated from the banked defilement clouds – This
is radiantly manifest being stainless and of all qualities possessed.
Like a lake filled with unpolluted water gradually overspread by lotus flowers, like the
full moon released from Rahu's mouth and the sun liberated from a sea of clouds, it is
free from affliction. Being free from pollution and possessing qualities, (Buddhahood is
endowed with the brilliant light rays (of correct and complete vision
(1) The example of a lake
covered with lotuses.
When we have desire, the
Jake is polluted and no
fotuses can grow
Buddha is pure, free from desire, which is explained using the metaphor of a lake
of pure water. When you have desire, the lake is polluted and no lotuses can
grow. When we speak of desire', usually we are thinking in terms of some gross
emotion that requires a bit of sweating, sighing, panting and all that. The word
chakpa is very good. It has the connotation of 'settled' or 'landed', like birds that
have settled or snow that has settled on the peak of the mountain. Of course
this is true when we have gross desire, but even when we only have a very subtle
attachment or fixation or grasping, it lands and settles. Not only that, it builds a
house, migrates there, and settles there forever! And so there's no room for
good qualities, because the attachment is big and it has occupied the space.
Likewise, our chakpa, our
attachment and grasping
takes up all the space, so
no lotuses can grow. But
Buddha is free from this
In our entire way of thinking, we encourage ourselves to have more chakpa, more
settling, and more fixation. And this takes up all the space, so no lotuses can
grow. Buddha does not have this kind of fixation, desire, and attachment, so
there is infinite space for his great qualities to grow, and these qualities are
symbolized by lotuses.
(2) Buddha is also free
from aggression, as
explained by the story of
Rahula trying to swallow
the moon
Buddha is also free from aggression, which is explained using a story. This is
one of the many stories from Hindu mythology used as examples in this text. I
can't remember the details, but Lord Indra or Shiva, I don't know who, was
distributing amrita, the nectar of immortality, to the gods. The asuras are the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
135



Buddha is free from
aggression, so his
compassion for sentient
beings is like the full
moon
archrivals of the gods, and Rahula, the son of an asura king, came to receive the
amrita disguised as another god. The sun and moon, which are the gods' spies,
knew he was an asura in disguise and they immediately reported this to Indra, so
Lord Indra refrained from giving the amrita to Rahula. So Rahula now bears a
grudge, and he tries to swallow the sun and moon every year. Unfortunately he
doesn't have a throat, only a mouth, so as soon as he swallows, they come out.
In the modern scientific world, it's called an eclipse. Buddha is free from these
kinds of grudges and aggression, so his compassion and love for sentient beings
are like the full moon.
(3) Buddha is free from
ignorance, like the sun
that is not covered by
clouds
The third example is one we have already used - the sun that is free of clouds.
Here the clouds symbolise ignorance. When the clouds go away, the sun can
shine, and that's how the wisdom of the Buddha shines. And the clouds are gone
in two ways. Primordially they have never been there, and then temporarily they
have gone away. This will be explained very thoroughly.
176
ཐུབ་པ་ཁྱུ་མཆོག་སྦྲང་རྩི་སྙིང་པོ་དང་
། །
རིན་ཆེན་གསེར་དང་གཏེར་དང་ལྗོན་པ་བཞིན། །
དྲི་མེད་རིན་ཆེན་བདེ་གཤེགས་སྐུ་དང་ནི། །
ས་བདག་གསེར་གྱི་གཟུགས་འདྲ་རྒྱལ་བ་ཉིད། །
Such Buddhahood is like the Victor, the best of all, like the honey, the kernels, the gold,
so valuable, the treasure, the great tree, the image of the Sugata, made of that which is
precious and pure, like the monarch of the world and the statue of gold.
Being similar to the statue of the] Muni, the leader of beings and to the honey, the
grain, the precious gold, the treasure, the mighty tree, the Sugata's statue {made from}
inimaculate precious material, the ruler of the earth and the golden image, la Buddha)
has gained victory.
The family names of the
Shakyas
The word tubpa, which is 'muni' in Sanskrit, is one of the family names of the
Shakyas. They had many family names, and another one is goramshingpa or
'sugar cane'. We also call the Buddha 'peerless sugar cane'! I think he got the
name tubpa, which means 'able', because there was incest at that time, and
people were shocked that people could even do such things.
Some examples used to
symbolise the Buddha: the
udumbara flower that is
very rare, and the four
supreme animals
But later of course, after Shakyamuni became enlightened, we can conveniently
interpret tubpa as 'one who has the ability to destroy the four maras'. Anyway,
tubpa, the Victorious One, the Buddha, is like the supreme animal (kyüchok). We
use all kinds of examples to symbolise the Buddha, like the ubumbara flower that
is used to symbolize the Buddha because it is so rare. Likewise, there are four
animals that have merit to be used as examples - elephant, lion, water buffalo
and unicorn. These supreme animals have particular qualities, e.g. when
elephants look at things, they are not intrusive or aggressive. They see you, but
they don't look at you in a way that makes you feel uncomfortable.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
136



There are nine examples
used to describe the
Buddha
There are some more examples coming now. Buddha is like a supreme animal;
honey without bees; a grain without husk; gold taken from the mud; treasure
found beneath the earth; a tree sprouting from a seed; a precious statue
unwrapped from dirty cloths; a king or prince born from an ordinary woman's
womb; and a golden statue that has come from an ordinary mould. These are
the examples in brief, and they will be explained again.
177
ཆུ་མཚོ་སོགས་བཞིན་འདོད་ཆགས་སོགས། །
གློ་བུར་ཉོན་མོངས་དག་པ་ནི། །
མདོར་ན་མི་རྟོག་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི། །
འབྲས་བུ་ཡིན་པར་རབ་ཏུ་བརྗོད། །
Purity - no accidental defilements (desire and the others) – is like the waters of the lake
and so forth. In brief it is described as being the fruit of the non-conceptualizing jñana.
Purity from the adventitious afflictions of desire and the other mental poisons is like the
water of the lake and so forth. When put concisely it can be fully shown as the fruit of
wisdom free from ideation.
The examples of lake,
moon and sun represent
that the Buddha is free
from nyöndrip, the
emotional obscurations
(attachment, aggression
and ignorance)
The three examples that were explained earlier (the lake of pure water filled with
lotuses, full moon liberated from Rahula's mouth, and the sun that is free from
being covered by clouds) represent that the Buddha is free from attachment,
aggression and ignorance. The causes of such liberation are infinite, but the
main one is non-conceptual wisdom that is free from all kinds of emotions. Just
keep in your head the two kinds of result of elimination that we talked about -
primordially pure, and with temporary or adventitious defilements having been
eliminated. If you can keep this in your head, then all these qualities mean a lot.
Otherwise, we are just praising someone for not having desire, anger, and
ignorance, which doesn't really describe the qualities of the Buddha.
178
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་གྱི་མཆོག་ལྡན་པའི། །
སངས་རྒྱས་སྐུ་ནི་ངེས་ཐོབ་པ། །
དེ་ནི་རྗེས་ལས་ཐོབ་པ་ཡི། །
ཡེ་ཤེས་འབྲས་བུ་ཡིན་པར་སྟོན། །
Authentic attainment of the Buddhakayas, endowed with those qualities that are
supreme of all, is taught as being the result of the jñana that ensues.
The actual attainment of the Buddhakaya, which has all supreme aspects, is explained
as the fruit of primordial wisdom ensuing from this after meditation.
The Buddha is also the
result of eliminating
shedrip, the cognitive
obscurations
In stanza 177 we were talking about the result of elimination of emotions, the
emotional obscurations or defilements (nyôndrip). In this stanza we are talking
about the result of elimination of the cognitive obscurations (sheydrip). You can
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
137



We are talking about a
body or kaya, sangyey kyi
ku, but it's not a physical
body with face, hands,
length and width etc.
see that here we are again talking about a body, a kaya. We are talking about the
body of the Buddha (sangyey kyi ku). But clearly we know that when we talk about
this body, we are not talking about a body with markings, such as face, hands,
length, colour, width, and all that. So why then do we call it a 'body? The word
ku or body usually refers to a container or support. The support for all the
perfections is called the body of the Buddha'. And here that body or support is
emptiness. It is emptiness and at the same time luminous. That is the
Buddhakaya, the Buddha's body, which the Buddha achieved by abandoning the
cognitive obscurations.
It is emptiness, which is
the support for all the
qualities of the Buddha,
achieved by abandoning
all cognitive obscurations
179
འདོད་ཆགས་རྡུལ་ནི་སྤང་ཕྱིར་དང་
། །
གདུལ་རྒྱུ་ཡི་ནི་པདྨ་ལ། །
བསམ་གཏན་ཆུ་ནི་འབབ་ཕྱིར་དེ། །
ཆུ་དག་རྫིང་དང་མཚུངས་པ་ཉིད།
This is like the lake of pure water and so on because the silt of desire has been removed
and because it causes the waters of meditative stability to sustain the "lotus" beings
who are to be trained.
Having eliminated the silt of desire, he lets the waters of meditative stability flow onto
the lotus-like) disciples and thus resembles the lake of pure water.
Buddha has no fixation,
so he is like a lake of pure
water
This is an extended version of everything that was said earlier. No dirt of
attachment or fixation exists within the Buddha. All the dirt of desire has been
abandoned. Therefore the Buddha can give Dharma to sentient beings that are
like a lotus, and this is why the Buddha is like a lake of pure water.
180
ཞེ་སྡང་སྒྲ་གཅན་ལས་གྲོལ་བས། །
སྙིང་རྗེ་བྱམས་ཆེན་འོད་ཟེར་གྱིས།
འགྲོ་བ་ཁྱབ་པའི་ཕྱིར་ན་དེ། །
དྲི་མེད་ཟླ་བ་ཉ་བ་བཞིན། །
It is like the unblemished full moon because being freed from hatred's Rahu, it
embraces all beings with its light of great compassion and loving-kindness.
Having freed himself from the Rahu of hatred, he pervades beings with the light rays of
his great love and compassionate concern and thus is similar to the immaculate full
moon.
Buddha has no
aggression, so his
compassion and love
radiate like the full moon
The Buddha is free from Rahula-like anger or aggression. That's why his
compassion and love are all-pervasive, radiating towards all sentient beings like
a stainless full moon.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
138



41
གཏི་མུག་སྤྲིན་ལས་རྣམ་གྲོལ་བ། །
འགྲོ་བར་ཡེ་ཤེས་འོད་ཟེར་གྱིས། །
མུན་པ་སེལ་ཕྱིར་སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད། །
དེ་ནི་དྲི་མེད་ཉི་མ་བཞིན། །
Buddhahood is like the immaculate sun because, being completely freed from the
clouds of ignorance, it dispels beings' darkness with its jñana's radiance.
Totally freed from the clouds of unknowing and dispelling (itsi darkness within beings
through the light rays of primordial wisdom, Buddhahood is similar to the unpolluted
sun.
Buddha has no ignorance,
so his wisdom radiates on
sentient beings like a
cloudless sun
Buddha has none of this cloud-like ignorance. He is completely free from this
ignorance. Again, keep in your mind the two ways of being free. And because
Buddha has no clouds of ignorance, he can generate rays of wisdom towards
sentient beings and illuminate their ignorance, which is why he is like the sun.
142
མི་མཉམ་མཉམ་པའི་ཆོས་ཕྱིར་དང
ར་དང་། །
མ་ཆོག་རོ་ནི་སྦྱིན་མཛད་དང་། །
ཤུན་པ་དང་ནི་བྲལ་ཕྱིར་དེ།
བདེ་གཤེགས་སྦྲང་རྩི་སྙིང་པོ་བཞིན། །
Because it has peerless qualities, because it gives the taste of true Dharma and because
it is free from ignorance's shell, it is likened to the Sugata, to honey and to the kernel.
Since enlightenment has/ peerless properties, since it bestows the taste of sacred
Dharma and since it is free from the peel of the veils)' it is like the Sugata, the honey
and the grain .
Why Buddha is like a
statue without wrapping.
honey without bees, and a
grain without a husk
Buddha is peerless. There is no one like him. His only peer, the only one who is
equal to him is himself. This is all an extended explanation of the summary we
had earlier. Buddha gives an infinite and endless taste of the Dharma to sentient
beings. He is free from the two obscurations that are like a husk, and therefore
the Buddha is like a statue that has no wrapping, honey that is not surrounded by
bees, and the grain that has no husk.
133
དག་ཕྱིར་ཡོན་ཏན་རྫས་ཀྱིས་ནི། །
དབུལ་བ་སེལ་བར་བྱེད་ཕྱིར་དང་། །
རྣམ་གྲོལ་འབྲས་བུ་འབྱིན་བྱེད་ཕྱིར། །
གསེར་དང་གཏེར་དང་ལྗོན་པ་བཞིན། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
139



Because it is naturally pure, because it dispels beings' poverties by its own wealth of
qualities and because it gives total liberation's fruit, it is likened to gold, a treasure and
the great tree.
Since it is purified, since (beings'] poverty is dispelled by the wealth of its qualities and
since it grants the fruit of total liberation, it is like the gold, the treasure and the tree.
Why Buddha is like the
gold, the treasure and the
tree
Buddha is primordially free from all the obscurations, and therefore he has
infinite enlightened qualities to dispel the pain of poverty within sentient beings.
And Buddha gives the fruit of liberation to sentient beings, which is why Buddha
is like gold, the treasure and the tree.
184
རིན་ཆེན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ཕྱིར་དང་། །
རྐང་གཉིས་བདག་པོའི་མཆོག་ཕྱིར་དང་། ། |
རིན་ཆེན་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
དེ་ནི་རིན་ཆེན་རྒྱལ་གསེར་བཞིན།
Because it is the "embodiment of jewel qualities”, because it is the “supreme lord of
bipeds" and because its form is an image of precious composition, it is likened to the
bejewelled, the monarch and the golden.
Representing the jewel of the dharmakaya and the attainment of the supreme lord of
humans and manifesting in the likeness of a precious image, they are like the
bejewelled, the king and the golden.
Why Buddha is like the
statue removed from the
mould, the chakravartin
and the gold removed
from the mud
Buddha is like a wishfulfilling gem, because he possesses the infinite qualities of
the dharmakaya. Again I would like to remind you as we talk about these
qualities that we are talking about the qualities of the result of elimination.
Buddha is the supreme liberator among the bipeds, and he can manifest in many
different forms in order to fulfil the wishes of sentient beings. This is why he is
like the statue that has been removed from the mould, the chakravartin, and the
gold removed from the mud.
185
ཟག་པ་མེད་ཁྱབ་འཇིག་མེད་ཆོས་ཅན་ཏེ། །
བརྟན་ཞི་རྟག་པ་འཕོ་མེད་གནས་ཡིན་ནོ། །
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་མཁའ་བཞིན་དག་པ་ཡི། །
དབང་པོ་དྲུག་དོན་ཉམས་སུ་མྱོང་བའི་རྒྱུ། །
Buddhahood-untainted and all-pervading - is of an indestructible nature because it is
everlasting, at peace, permanent and undying. It is the ground for benefiting beings.
The tathagatas are like space, the basis for objects of the six sense faculties to be
experienced by the excellent.
Rid of pollution and all-pervasive, true Buddhahood) has an indestructible nature
since it is steadfast, at peace, permanent and unchanging. As the abode (of qualities) a
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
140



tathagata is similar to space. For the six sense-faculties of a saintly being it forms the
cause to experience their respective (pure) objects for perception).
The Buddha's body, the
dharmakaya, is stainless,
alt-pervasive,
Indestructible, stable,
peaceful, permanent and
undying, and it is the
support for all qualities
The body of the Buddha, the Buddhakaya, is stainless and without emotions.
This Buddha's body, the dharmakaya is all-pervasive and indestructible. It is
stable because it has no decay. It is peaceful (shiwa) because it has no sickness.
It is permanent because it has no birth. It does not transform because it has no
death. And it is the support or the container for all the virtuous qualities of
oneself and others.
The meaning of 'peace'.
It's not about being
against worldly violence
Here, peace means
overcoming the violence
of dualism
When we talk about peace or peaceful (shiwa), we are talking about the path of
peace or non-violence. It's quite important to understand what is meant here,
because generally when we talk about non-violence in the mundane world, we're
talking about things like disarmament, which is more like a philanthropically
oriented non-violence. We are not saying that going to an anti-war
demonstration is the quintessence of the Dharma. It has got nothing to do with
that. Of course, as a Buddhist it's good to be against war and against violence.
But when we talk about peace here, we're talking about much more than that.
Here we refer to violence as anything to do with dualism. Anything to do with
dualism is aggression. Therefore, anything to do with dualism is pain, and
Buddha does not have that. Again, when we talk about Buddha, don't think we
are only referring to a person. It can also refer to the Buddha-nature, which is
the profound aspect of the Uttaratantra-shastra. Not having the pain of dualism
is what we refer to as peace.
When we talk about
*Buddha', we are not only
talking about a person,
but also about Buddha-
nature
Buddha is permanent, but
he does not exist like the
gods of theistic religions.
Buddha was never born
Likewise, Buddha has no
death or transformation
Here we say Buddha is permanent (tagpa). Why? Many theistic religions might
consider their god or whatever to be permanent, but they also say their god
exists. And the characteristic of existence is that it has been born, it is abiding,
and whether they know it or not, by consequence it will cease to exist. But when
we say Buddha is permanent, it is because Buddha was never born. There is no
arising of the Buddha, it doesn't even exist, and therefore it is permanent. In
fact, it is almost a contradiction to say something is existing and also permanent.
Existing means it has been born, born means it's dwelling, and that means
eventual death - and that's not permanent. And similarly Buddha has no death.
Therefore there is no transformation. Here we are not talking about a symbolic
Buddha such as Shakyamuni. Of course, when we talk about the symbolic
Shakyamuni, Prince Siddhartha, we talk about his birth date, the anniversary of
his parinirvana, and all of that.
Here we are not referring
to a symbolic Buddha
such as Shakyamuni, who
had a birth date etc.
We might think this
Buddha is useless, but he
isn't - he is the support of
all the virtuous qualities
of self and others, like
space. This is how
Buddha manifests
All this might make you think that this kind of Buddha is useless. It's not born
and therefore it doesn't exist, so what is its benefit? A lot! Because it's the
support of all the virtuous qualities of self and others. This will be explained in
detail, but here it is briefly compared to the sky or space. The sky does not
think, 'I am going to let these people sit in this space', but because of the space
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
141



it provides we are able to function here. That's how Buddha manifests and
benefits sentient beings. This is explained further.
186
འབྱུང་མེད་གཟུགས་དོན་བལྟ་དང་གཏམ་བཟང་ནི། !
གཙང་མ་མཉན་དང་བདེ་གཤེགས་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི། 1
དྲི་གཙང་སྣོམ་དང་འཕགས་ཆེན་དམ་ཆོས་རོ། །
མྱོང་དང་ཏིང་འཛིན་རེག་བདེ་ཉམས་མྱོང་དང་། །
It is the condition for form beyond the four elements to be seen, for the good and pure
sound to be heard, for the pure fragrance of perfect conduct of the Sugalas to be smelt,
for the flavour of true Dharma of the great and deeply-realized to be tasted,
It is the cause for visible objects, which are non-arising, to be seen, for good and pure
speech to be heard, for the pure scent of the moral conduct of the Sugata to be smelled,
for the flavour of sacred Dharma (of) the great noble ones to be tasted,
How does Buddha see or
hear things?
The question is this: does Buddha see things, does Buddha taste things, and does
he use his six senses and six consciousnesses as we do? Since his body is not a
product of elements, none of the five elements is involved, so non-involvement
of elements is how he sees things. All characteristics have been purified (tsenma
mepa), so there is no more dualism. This is how he hears: the good and pure
sound of characteristiclessness. And because he has no dualism, he has no
downfalls. Having no downfalls is perfect discipline, and perfection of discipline
is how he smells. All phenomena are understood as non-dualistic and therefore
equal, because there are no distinctions such bad and good. This is how he
enjoys the taste of oneness.
Without any elements,
dualism or characteristics.
All phenomena are
understood as non-dual
and therefore equal,
which is how he enjoys
the taste of oneness
187
རང་གི་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཟབ་པའི་ཚུལ། །
རྟོགས་པའི་རྒྱུར་གྱུར་ཞིབ་མོར་བསམས་པ་ན།
དོན་དམ་བདེ་མཛད་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ནི། །
ནམ་མཁའ་བཞིན་དུ་རྒྱུ་མཚན་རྣམས་དང་བྲལ། ། |
For the bliss in samadhi to be experienced and for the essence, the deep nature, to be
realized. Therefore, when considered in a very fine way, the tathagatas, who give birth
to true bliss, are like space, devoid of reasons.
For the blissful touch of samadhi to be felt and for the mode of the Dharma), which is
by essence deep, to be realized. When reflected upon in a very fine way, a sugata
bestowing true bliss is like space, devoid of any reasons.
He dwells in non-dualism,
so experiences no bodily
discomfort, and he sees
with self-awareness. But
all this is beyond our
comprehension
Since discomfort comes from dualism, and he dwells in non-dualism, he feels no
discomfort with his body. And with his mind he sees things as unborn right from
the beginning, therefore there is no dwelling and no cessation. So he sees things
with self-awareness. But like the sky, if we examine this we cannot really
comprehend. It is beyond ordinary people's comprehension.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
142



386
མདོར་ན་ཡེ་ཤེས་གཉིས་པོ་ཡི། །
ལས་སུ་འདི་ནི་ཤེས་བྱ་སྟེ། །
གྲོལ་བའི་སྐུ་ནི་རྫོགས་པ་དང་
། །
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ནི་སྦྱོང་བའོ། །
The function of the two jñanas, expressed concisely, is to be known as perfect
fulfilment of the vimuktikaya and accomplishment of the dharmakaya.
In brief, ſtwo kayas) are to be understood as functions of the two primordial wisdoms:
the vimuktikaya (representing/ perfection and the dharmakaya (representingi refinement.
Buddha's infinite actions
can be categorised into
two: the body of
liberation, and the
dharmakaya
The body of liberation has
no defilements. The
dharmakaya has all-
pervasive wisdom, and
both kayas are
uncompounded
Buddha has infinite actions or activity. But all his actions can be abbreviated into
two aspects. First is the perfection of purification, the perfect purification of
defilements, through which he has achieved the body of liberation. And second,
he has perfected the purification of cognitive obscurations, through which he has
attained the dharmakaya. These two kayas or bodies have three qualities. The
bodies have one quality each, and they have one common quality. The quality of
the body of liberation is that there are no defilements, and the quality of the
dharmakaya is all-pervasive wisdom. The common quality of both kayas is that
they are uncompounded. This will be explained in more detail.
389
རྣམ་གྲོལ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་རྟག་ནི། །
ཉིས་རྣམ་གཅིག་ཤེས་བྱ་སྟེ། །
ཟག་པ་མེད་ཕྱིར་ཁྱབ་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
འདུས་མ་བྱས་ཕྱིར་གནས་ཉིད་ཕྱིར། །
རྣམ་གཉིས
Being untainted and all-embracing, and since they are the uncreated ground, the
vimuktikaya and the dharmakaya should be known as having two attributes and one.
Vimuktikaya and dharmakaya are to be known in terms of the two aspects and ſa
commoni one, as they are free from pollution and all-pervasive, uncreated and thus
embody the ground {of virtuel.
Buddha has no emotional
defilements, so he has no
fixations. This is wisdom
For the Buddha, all defilements and their propensities have ceased to exist, so he
has the quality of not being fixated on one object (chakpa mepa). He has no
defilements, so he has no fixation. This is the first quality, his wisdom.
19C
ཉོན་མོངས་རྣམས་ནི་བག་ཆགས་དང་
།
བཅས་པ་འགགས་ཕྱིར་ཟག་མེད་དེ། །
ཆགས་མེད་ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
ཡེ་ཤེས་ཁྱབ་པ་ཉིད་དུ་འདོད།
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
143



One is untainted because the defilements along with their accompanying conditioning,
have ceased. Jnana is considered as all-embracing because it is unattached and
unimpeded.
Since the mental poisons along with their remaining imprints are ended, the
vimuktikaya) is free from any pollution. Since there is no attachment and obstruction,
{the dharmakaya) is considered as pervasive primordial wisdom.
Buddha has no cognitive
obscurations, so his
wisdom is infinite and all-
pervasive
The second quality is that there is no obstruction. Because he has no cognitive
obscurations, there are no obstructions. So his wisdom is infinite and all-
pervasive.
191
གཏན་དུ་འཇིག་པ་མེད་པ་ཡི། །
རང་བཞིན་ཡིན་ཕྱིར་འདུས་མ་བྱས། །
འཇིག་མེད་ཉིད་ནི་བསྟན་པ་སྟེ། །
བརྟན་སོགས་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་དེ་བཤད་དོ། ། I
They are uncreated since their nature is at all times indestructible. This indestructibility
has been mentioned and explained as everlastingness and so on.
Being of a nature forever indestructible (neither kaya) is something that is created.
While "indestructibility” is the concise explanation of uncreatedness), it is taught in
more detail through the topici “steadfast' and so forth.
Both wisdoms are
indestructible, so they are
permanent
Both wisdoms can never be destroyed. Therefore, they are indestructible, which
is a kind of permanence. Now there is an extended explanation of why it is
indestructible. There are four kinds of destruction.
192
འཇིག་པ་རྣམ་བཞིར་ཤེས་བྱ་སྟེ། །
བརྟན་སོགས་དག་ལས་བཟློག་ཕྱིར་རོ།
མྱུགས་དང་རྣམ་འགྱུར་ཆད་པ་དང་། 1
བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་འགྱུར་འཕོ་བ་སྟེ། །
Destructibility is to be known through these four aspects since they are the counterparts
of everlastingness etc - decay, drastic change, interruption and the inconceivable
change of death.
“Destructibility is to be understood [in terms of four aspects, since it constitutes the
contrary of " steadfastness” and so on. These are decay, drastic change, being cut-off
and transmigration, which is inconceivable {and) a transformation fin various' ways.
The four kinds of
destruction
The four kinds of destruction are the opposites of four positive aspects of
stability, peace, unchangingness and so on. Because Buddha has a stainless
quality, his body cannot decay or become dented.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
144



Maitreya has written the root text in a very condensed way, and Khenpo Kunga
Wangchuk used to say this is because Maitreya is a god, a heavenly creature, and
the way they talk is a little different from how ordinary human beings talk! But
you don't need to worry about this too much, because what you really need to
understand is that the Buddha is the result of elimination.
Emotions or defilements
are referred to as
sakchey, which has the
connotation of dropping
or discharge
And maybe we can simplify this a little. We need to understand the word
sakchey, which means 'emotions', where sak means 'dropping' or 'falling', and
chey means someone or something that has that. When we talk about
defilements' (nyönmongpa) in philosophy, we will often use the term sakchey as
in sakchey nyönmongpa. It has the connotation of dropping, and you can even
understand this literally, like rabbit droppings. One of the main characteristics of
defilements is that they create droppings, a lot of garbage or stains. It's like the
white stuff that comes from your eyes, the discharge. That's a good word. Any
time there are defilements, it's almost synonymous to discharging something.
Defilements discharge things. They give birth to things. This term sakchey is
very good, and it is often used to refer to defilements.
Defilements discharge
things. They give birth to
things
Defilements are the
reason that we feel pain
For example, someone
could feel pain if a tree is
cut down
This is quite important. Right now, if someone pokes our body with a needle or a
thorn, we feel pain. Why do we feel pain? Because of our defilements, because
of sakchey. And these defilements are fixation, which is basically our clinging.
And this is so big. For example, imagine someone who is a fanatical
environmentalist. If somebody cuts the branch of a very beautiful tree, this
person will feel it and go crazy. They really go through pain! And we are just
like that with our body. We are very attached to this body, just like the
environmentalist is attached to the tree. Also, literally, if someone else is
chewing something sour, you feel saliva in your mouth. All this is proof of
sakchey and the function of defilements. As long as you're in samsara, you're
always falling. And samsara means the product of defilements. Sometimes we
climb up, but just so we can fall. So don't climb too high!
The Buddha doesn't have
any defilements or any of
their propensities, the
bagchak
The Buddha doesn't have any of that. He doesn't have defilements at all. He
doesn't even have their propensities (bagchak). The defilements are all gone,
right from the root. This is what we mean when we say his body does not get
rotten. There are no defilements, so there is no transformation of his body. That
happens to us. For instance, if we travel from a hot place to a cold place, we
might catch a cold, as our elements are changing. I shouldn't use the word
'transforming'. But there is no changing of the elements for the Buddha, as he
has no defilements, so he doesn't have a gross body. So there is no changing of
his elements. I guess you could say he is fully immune! Although when we talk
about 'immune', we also talk about its opposite. And for the Buddha, that
opposite is gone, so I don't know if we should call it 'fully immune'. Because of
that, he does not shed his old skin, so to speak. Therefore, there is no new skin.
Meaning, there is no rebirth, no transformation, and therefore no death.
Therefore he is not
subject to rebirth,
transformation or death
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
145



193
དེ་མེད་ཕྱིར་ན་བརྟན་ཞི་དང་། །
རྟག་དང་འཕོ་མེད་ཤེས་པར་བྱ།
དྲི་མེད་ཤེས་དེ་དཀར་པོ་ཡི། །
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྟེན་ཡིན་ཕྱིར་ན་གནས། །
Since enlightenment is free of these, it should be known as everlasting, at peace,
permanent and deathless. This intelligence so stainless is "the ground" because it is the
foundation for all virtuous qualities.
Since the vimuktikaya and the dharmakaya) are free from these (features, they are to
be known as steadfast, peaceful, permanent and unchanging. As absence of pollution
and (primordial] wisdom are the support for the unstained properties to come forth in
the disciples), they are also the abode of the best possible benefit for others).
This Buddha is useful as
he is the support or
ground of all virtuous
thoughts and actions of
self and others
The Buddha is not a
person who sends
compassion etc. That
would be theistic
So can we do something with this Buddha? Can we use this Buddha? Yes. He is
the support and ground of all the virtuous thoughts and actions of self and
others. Before we were talking about two kinds of result of elimination. Let's
imagine if the sky had clouds or the sky came with clouds. Then you would have
no hope. But the fact is that the sky is not cloud, so all the virtuous actions of
trying to see the sky without cloud are possible. And that's the activity of the
Buddha. That's also his compassion. We have to put it like that otherwise it's
too dangerous. If we had a real person called Buddha who sends compassion or
doesn't send compassion and all that, then it would all become too theistic. This
is explained further in the next stanza.
194
ཇི་ལྟར་རྒྱུ་མིན་ནམ་མཁའ་ནི། །
གཟུགས་མཐོང་བ་དང་སྒྲ་དང་དྲི། །
རོ་དང་རེག་དང་ཆོས་རྣམས་ནི། །
ཐོས་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རྒྱུ་ཡིན་ལྟར། །
Just as space, which is without cause, is the cause of seeing, hearing and so on forms,
sounds, odours, sensations and mental data,
Space is not a cause and yet the cause for all visible things to be seen, for sound, odour,
flavour, touch and phenomena to be heard and so on.
Space is not the cause of
form, yet because of
space we are able to see,
hear, smell, taste and feel
Sky or space is not a cause of form, yet without the sky or space, you will not see
form, hear sound, smell, taste or feel. You will not think of anything. In this
sense you can say that because of the sky we can do all of that.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
146



j5
དེ་བཞིན་སྐུ་གཉིས་སྒྲིབ་མེད་པའི། །
སྦྱོར་བས་བསྟན་པའི་དབང་དོན་ལ། །
ཟག་པ་མེད་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་དག །
སྐྱེབ་ཡི་ནི་རྒྱུ་ཡིན་ནོ། །
Likewise this is the condition for the untainted qualities to arise as objects of stable
beings' sense faculties through their unimpeded connection with the two kayas.
just so, they cause the unstained qualities to arise as objects sensed by those whose
vision is stable by junction with the unveiled (seeing of the two kayas.
When Bodhisattvas
understand that the kayas
are primordially free from
defilements, they can
engage in all kinds of
practices and aspirations
When the Bodhisattvas understand that all obstacles are temporary, and that the
Buddha-nature or in this case the two kayas are absent of all defilements right
from the beginning, then based on that they can engage in all kinds of practice
and aspiration, like the six paramitas and all that.
96
བམན་མེད་རྟག་བརྟན་ནི་བ་གཡུང་དྲུང་ཉིད། །
རབ་ཏུ་ཞི་ཁྱབ་རྟོག་བྲལ་ནམ་མཁའ་བཞིན། །
ཆགས་མེད་ཀུན་ཏུ་ཐོགས་མེད་རྩུབ་རེག་སྤངས། །
ལྟ་གཟུང་མེད་དགེ་སངས་རྒྱས་དྲི་མ་མེད།
Buddhahood is inconceivable, permanent, everlasting, at peace, immutable, perfectly at
peace, all-embracing and concept-free. Like space, it is unclinging, completely
unhindered, free of coarse sensation, invisible, imperceptible, wholesome and
immaculate.
Buddhahood is inconceivable, permanent, steadfast, at peace and immutable. It is
utterly peaceful, pervasive, without thought and unattached like space. It is free from
hindrance and coarse objects of contact are eliminated. It cannot be seen or grasped.
It is virtuous and tree from pollution.
The 15 qualities of the
Buddha
The Buddha is inconceivable, permanent, stable or everlasting, peaceful,
unchanging, perfect, all-pervasive, and completely free from all kinds of
conceptions, like space. It's unclinging and unobstructed. It cannot be perceived
through eyes, so I guess you can say it's invisible. It cannot be perceived, yet it
has the qualities of virtue and wholesomeness. These are the 15 qualities of the
Buddha,
7
རྣམ་གྲོལ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་དག་གིས། །
རང་དང་གཞན་གྱི་དོན་བསྟན་ཏེ། །
རང་གཞན་དོན་རྟེན་དེ་ལ་ནི།
བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་སོགས་ཡོན་ཏན་ལྡན། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
147



One's own fulfilment and benefit for beings are manifested through the vimuktikaya
and the dharmakaya. These two foundations, of own-value and value-for-others, have
the above qualities of inconceivability and so forth.
As were explained the vimuktikaya and the dharmakaya (accomplish) benefit for
oneself and benefit for others. These {kayas), being the support of this twofold benefit,
possess the qualities of being inconceivable and so forth.
The two kayas, the two
bodies of the Buddha
have 15 qualities, to
benefit himself and others
Who has these 15 qualities? Both bodies, the body of liberation and the wisdom.
Not separately, but together. And for what purpose does he have these 15
qualities? To benefit himself and others. All this is explained again.
198
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཡུལ། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཤེས་གསུམ་ཡུལ་མིན་ཕྱིར། །
ཡེ་ཤེས་ལུས་ཅན་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ནི། །
བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་པར་རྟོགས་པར་བྱ། །
Buddhahood is the domain of omniscient jñana and not within the scope of the three
prajñas. Therefore the jñana-kaya should be understood as inconceivable for beings.
Being the object of the omniscient primordial wisdom, Buddhahood is not an object for
the three types of insight. So even those with a wisdom body must realize that (Buddha
enlightenment is inconceivable.
#1: Inconceivable
Only the Buddha can
perceive the Buddha's
wisdom. Ordinary beings
cannot even conceive of it
Buddha is only the object of his own wisdom. Therefore, the wisdom of the
Buddha cannot be perceived even by other sublime beings, and ordinary beings
cannot even conceive of the Buddha's wisdom. Usually when we understand an
object, there are three ways to understand it, by hearing, contemplating, or
meditating. But Buddha cannot be understood in any of these ways.
199
ཕྲ་ཕྱིར་ཐོས་པའི་ཡུལ་མིན་ཏེ། །
དོན་དམ་ཡིན་ཕྱིར་བསམ་བྱའི་མིན་
ཆོས་ཉིད་ཟབ་ཕྱིར་འཇིག་རྟེན་པའི། 1
བསྒོམ་པ་ལ་སོགས་ཡུལ་མ་ཡིན། །
Being so subtle, it is not an object of study. Being the ultimate truth, it is not
contemplation's domain. Being the profound universal essence, it is not within the
scope of the mundane sorts of meditation and so on.
Being subtle it is not an object for study. Being absolute it cannot be reflected upon.
Dharmata is deep. Hence it is not an object for any worldly meditation and so on.
The Buddha cannot be
heard, contemplated or
meditated upon. This last
aspect is explained in
detail in the mahasandhi
It is very subtle, so it cannot be heard. It is the absolute truth, so it cannot be
contemplated. It is the profound reality of everything without any characteristics,
so it cannot be meditated upon. This last aspect, "cannot be meditated upon", is
explained in detail in the Vajrayana, especially in mahamudra and mahasandhi.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment 148



200
གང་ཕྱིར་གཟུགས་ལ་དམུས་ལོ་ང་བཞིན། །
བྱིས་པས་དེ་སྔོན་མཐོང་མ་མྱོང་། །
བཙས་པའི་ཁྱིམ་ནས་བུ་ཆུང་གིས། །
ཉི་མའི་གཟུགས་བཞིན་འཕགས་པས་ཀྱང་།
This is because the immature have never seen this before – like the blind before visible
form. Even the deeply-realized are like the newly born, seeing the sun from within their
room.
Why {is it hard to realize]? Like the blind with regard to the visible, the children have
never seen it before. Even noble ones see it as babies would glimpse the sun from
within the house where they are born.
The Buddha cannot be
perceived because there
are no references, like a
person born blind cannot
conceive of shapes or
colours
Why is it unperceivable? Because there is no reference for ordinary beings. For
someone who is blind right from the beginning it's impossible to conceive of
shapes and colours. Likewise, ordinary beings, those who are blind right from
the beginning, cannot conceive of the Buddha. And even those who have a little
bit of a reference such as Shravakas or Pratyekabuddhas dare not look. It is like
a small child, maybe seven days old, who cannot look at the sun directly because
it is too strong. Some scholars also include the Bodhisattvas here. This has been
an explanation of the first quality of the Buddha, 'inconceivable'.
This is the first quality of
the Buddha, inconceivable
201
སྐྱེ་དང་བྲལ་ཕྱིར་རྟག་པ་སྟེ། །
འགག་མེད་ཕྱིར་ན་བརྟན་པ་ཡིན། །
གཉིས་མེད་ཕྱིར་དེ་ཞི་བ་སྟེ། །
གཡུང་དྲུང་ཆོས་ཉིད་གནས་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
Permanent, since it has no origination, everlasting, since it has no cessation, at peace,
being free from both, immutable, since it abides in the true nature,
Since it is free from being bor, it is permanent. Since it is without cessation, it is
steadfast. Since these two are not present, it is peaceful. It is immutable, for the
Dharmata {ever remains.
#2: Permanent
Buddha is unborn, so it is
permanent. It is
unchanging like the sky
Now the second quality, 'permanent'. Why is it permanent? Because it is free
from birth. Since Buddha was never born, it cannot cease to exist, so it's called
permanent. And when there is none of the dualism of birth and death, that is
peace (shiwa). And the quality of the Buddha has never changed, because there
is no birth, no old age, no sickness, and no death. Whether clou are ther
or not, the sky does not change. Likewise, whether the defilements are there or
not, it's unchanging (yungdrung). It has the quality that it is unchanging.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
149



Day 2
Introduction
What do we understand
by enlightenment?
I would like to clarify a few things about yesterday. We are talking about
enlightenment (changchub). This is difficult, because we can get mixed up
between enlightenment and an enlightened being. So let me ask you, how do
you interpret the word 'enlightenment? Without using religious influences, what
does it mean to you?
Our emotional mind
thinks it refers to things
like continuous residing
in the state of awareness
Student Union of the personal with the universal, i.e. what exists beyond the
person.
(Student) Total compassion.
[Rinpoche] You are talking about an enlightened being. You think enlightenment
is continuous non-stop recognition, continuous residing in the state of
awareness? This is helpful. I think it will clear some of the misunderstanding.
Students] Elimination of fear, no more fear ... Potentialised faith ... When we
have no hatred inside us, like a child Inconceivable, so one cannot give it a
description.
[Rinpoche] It's good that you said, "continuous residing in the state of
awareness". This is how our emotional mind thinks! Are you talking about an
enlightened being or enlightenment?
[Student] They are the same thing.
(Rinpoche) The idea of continuous' is a little bit faulty. If you take it literally, the
aspect continuous' is a little bit permanent.
(Student) It's 'naturally continuous'!
[Rinpoche) You are trying your best, that's good. Somehow that's the way we
talk here anyway! But I'd like to challenge you to help you understand more.
This indicates that there's
a point where there is no
residing, and something
called non-awareness
We also have ideas like
the union of the personal
with the universal, which
indicates that we are not
yet united and so we
struggle to unite
If we talking about residing and awareness, about "residing in the state of
awareness", it all indicates to me that there's a point where there is no residing,
and there is something called 'non-awareness'. And this idea of the "union of
the personal and universal" is something I have heard from many people. There
seems to be a great longing to be part of everything! But what do we mean by
universe? If the term 'universe' refers to emptiness or the whole of phenomena, 1
think perhaps it can work. But I have a doubt, as when you say the union of
personal with the universe, it automatically makes me think that you are not yet
united, and that you are struggling to unite, which you are calling the path. Yes,
why not? But if you really suggest that, it might not work with the description of
Buddha-nature. As we were saying yesterday, the sky is primordially pure or free
from cloud, meaning it's already united.
When the cloud goes away
we assume the sky is
clear. But it has always
been clear
(Student) We could call it the reactivated power of the original mind
[Rinpoche) That sounds a bit like the cloud going away and then seeing the sky.
Are you talking about something like that? When the cloud goes away, we
assume the sky is clear. But the sky has always been clear. All this can work.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
150



Whether we talk of
enlightenment in terms of
ground or result, it's all in
terms of the path.
Cround, path and result
only exist as relative truth
[Student] To speak about sky, we need to speak about clouds even if clouds are
not part of sky. So to speak of enlightenment, we need to speak of what is not
enlightenment.
[Rinpoche] Yes, you are right. When we talk about enlightenment either in terms
of the ground or in terms of the result, we are talking in terms of path. Ground,
path, result - all this exists only on the relative level.
(Student) Enlightenment is a state beyond all concepts, indescribable.
(Rinpoche] Yes, it's very difficult to describe, because we live in our own very
small world. And we only have a very limited amount of rationality and logic. We
know that 2+2 = 4, but we cannot even conceive that 2+2 could be 5.
Student) There are many systems of mathematics based on that, on different
logic systems. We can conceive a thing like that!
[Rinpoche) You are not intoxicated? Did you count one and two, like that? I'm
interested! That's good.
We can only conceive of
limitless' to a certain
extent, and we call that
inexpressible or
inconceivable
But what I'm saying is that we can only conceive of 'limitless' to a certain extent,
or within a certain limit, and we have to speak within that boundary. And this is
called 'inexpressible', 'unthinkable', or 'inconceivable'. I think all religions would
say this about their god, just like that. But you have to be careful, because the
way it's said here may be different. As you said earlier, we can only talk about
sky in the context of cloud. It's like Maitreya's example that if you're blind right
from the beginning, you have no visual reference to talk about colours like blue,
white, and all that. Maybe you can say red is hot, blue is cold, and things like
that, but that's not really a colour.
Here 'inconceivable'
refers to a sky that never
had any clouds. So there
is no clearing away the
clouds and no seeing the
sky. Basically, there is no
path
When we talk about 'inconceivable', we are talking about a sky that never had a
cloud. You might want to ask, why do we talk about that? It's very important,
and it will be explained today. If we don't talk about a sky that never had a
cloud, then we can't talk about a sky that has clouds. And without the sky that
has clouds there can be no clearing of the clouds, seeing the sky and all that.
Basically, there is no path.
During the path,
inferential logic is all we
have to conceive of
enlightenment. Only the
yogis can have direct
cognition of mind
Enlightenment is not conceivable within our very limited logic, reasoning and
rationalism, but we still have to talk about the path. And during the path,
inferential logic is all that beings like us can use during hearing, contemplation
and most of our meditation. Direct cognition of objects like form and sounds
with the five sense consciousnesses may be possible, as in “I'm looking at this
flower". But I think that for the Chittamatrin school and the Madhyamika school,
direct cognition of mind is simply not possible for ordinary people. It can only be
done with the yogi's direct cognition (naljor ngönsum).
We cannot perceive
enlightenment directly.
but we can infer that
emotions like anger are
temporary just like clouds
Likewise, direct perception of enlightenment is just not possible for us. So we
can only infer. And how do we do that? By speaking about the clouds. We can
think that just as clouds are temporary, our emotions like anger are also
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
151



temporary, because nobody is angry continuously, permanently, non-stop. I'm
sure there are some people who get angry a lot, but a lot means 'a lot', it doesn't
mean all the time, non-stop! For instance, when they sneeze, or during deep
sleep, they may be not angry! So anger doesn't continue all the time. Anger, or
whatever emotion you have, changes. And if you are at first angry because of
so-and-so, then this anger leads to another one. So even if anger is continuing,
it's not the same one. Anger continues, but it doesn't exist. If it did, actually,
the world would be much safer. If one particularly instance of anger were to
continue, then you would know what to do with it, because there would only be
the one anger that was continuing. But it's changing all the time. So the only
thing we can do is infer. We also know that anger is temporary because all our
emotions come from causes and conditions. We get upset because somebody
did something to us. And because of that, we know that anger is temporary,
because it has a beginning. This is good news, as it means you can manipulate
the cause of anger. For example, you can stop going to visit the person who
angers you.
We know that defilements
are removable, and once
they are removed, that's
enlightenment. But it's
not pure absence, like the
exhaustion of fire
So somehow we know from this inferential logic that all these defilements are
removable. And when we talk about enlightenment or the Buddha-nature, we
use this same logic. All this garbage is removable. But when we manage to
remove it, what happens? When we remove the dirt, negative emotions, and
defilements - the elimination and absence of all that it's not like the exhaustion
of fire or evaporation of moisture. This is quite important, because we actually
do get angry, have desire and all of these emotions, and it actually makes us
more solid. We can't just imagine a state without any of these emotions, without
any of these subject-object activities.
But we cannot imagine a
state without emotions
and subject-object
activities
Complete emptiness is
infinite abundance. It's
something you can pray
to, and by praying you
actually receive blessings
We can talk about complete emptiness, yes, but what does that mean? There is a
potential problem here, as it's not like evaporation of moisture. It's abundance,
it's infinite, it's someone who you can pray to, and by praying it actually gives
you blessings and all of that. This is why it's difficult. Imagine that you want to
see the clear blue sky, but at the moment there is a cloud. And maybe your
friend says, "let's go, we won't see the sky today". But you say, "no, wait a
minute, this cloud might go". You have confidence and devotion that behind this
grey cloud is the blue sky, and that is basically how prayer works. It works
because you have that confidence. It doesn't mean that by waiting for another
half hour that the blue sky becomes more powerful and actually reveals itself.
It's nothing like that!
Prayer works because you
have devotion, like the
confidence that there is
blue sky behind the grey
clouds
Changchub, the word for
enlightenment, has two
connotations: purification
and realisation:
All this is very well explained here in the terms of three kayas. It's so beautifully
set up. The Tibetan word for enlightenment (changchub) has two connotations.
Chang means 'purification', and chub means 'realisation'. When we talk of chang
or sang (as in sangyey or Buddha), we are talking about the quality that
enlightenment is primordially pure, or that the temporary defilements can be
removed and that it has reached the level of purity after they have been removed.
Chang means purification.
Enlightenment is
primordially pure, or all
temporary defilements
have been removed
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
152



Chub means realisation.
Enlightenment has all the
enlightened qualities, with
no increasing and no
decreasing
And with chub, we are talking about the same thing, but its other aspect, namely
that it has all the enlightened qualities. The Heart Sutra says there is "no
decreasing and no increasing". Even if there are clouds in the sky seemingly
forever, just like in England, it doesn't mean that the blue sky decreases. And
even if the sky were cloudless for years, the quality of the sky wouldn't increase.
Whether beings engage in
virtuous or non-virtuous
thoughts and actions, the
quality of the Buddha
does not change at all
Even for ordinary sentient beings who are not practicing, even if they are killing,
stealing, lying, and engaging in all kinds of non-virtuous thoughts and actions,
the quality of the Buddha does not decrease. And you might be practicing very
diligently, perhaps doing 500,000 prostrations instead of 100,000. But the
quality of the Buddha does not increase even one hair's breadth. So what's the
point of practice? To actualise that Buddha! To understand it, not just
academically or intellectually. And what's the benefit? There is a lot of benefit.
For instance, by knowing there is no decreasing, there is no fear. And by
knowing there is no increasing, there is no hope.
If we know this, then we
have no hope and fear
Ordinary beings like us
can only generalise about
this, but the path will not
mistead us
But still we have a problem. The problem is that when we talk about it we can
only generalise. There is only one person who can talk without generalising,
that's the enlightened person, the Buddha. Even tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas can't
do this. Ordinary sentient beings make generalisations all the time. For
example, we talk about just five negative emotions - anger, desire, jealousy,
pride, and ignorance - which is a big generalisation. There may be many other
emotions. But don't think that the path is therefore a little unreliable because we
can only generalise. All these generalisations are very accurate. Basically, the
path will not mislead you. It will lead you to the higher path, and then you will
generalise less.
Yesterday we read many stanzas describing qualities of the dharmakaya, the two
bodies of wisdom and liberation. And there's quite a lot more today.
202
རབ་ཞི་འགོག་པའི་བདེན་པའི་ཕྱིར།
ཐམས་ཅད་རྟོགས་ཕྱིར་ཁྱབ་པ་ཉིད། 1
གནས་པ་མེད་ཕྱིར་རྟོག་མེད་དེ། །
ཉོན་མོངས་སྤངས་ཕྱིར་ཆགས་པ་མེད། །
Perfectly at ease, since it is cessation's truth, all-embracing since all has been
understood, concept-free, since it does not dwell, unclinging, since ali defilements have
been dispelled,
it is utter peace, since the truth of cessation (is revealed). Since everything is realized, it
pervades (all the knowable). Since it does not dwell upon anything, it is without
ideation. Since the mental poisons are eliminated, it has no attachment.
This state of enlightenment is peaceful. It can also refer to an enlightened being.
Although we can only use inferential logic to describe the state, there are also
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
153



Enlightenment is peaceful
as all causes of suffering
are eliminated. This
refers to nirodha
people and beings who have actually reached that state. We are talking about
both. Sometimes we will talk about them almost together, sometimes separately.
It will be indicated very clearly. Anyway that state or being is peaceful, as the
causes of suffering are all eliminated. This line actually describes nirodha, the
cessation of suffering.
Applying the Four Noble
Truths to curing a
headache
Normally we think in
terms of knowing that you
have a headache, finding
its cause, and then taking
some medicine
I'll give you a very bad example of nirodha. The first of the Four Noble Truths is
"know the suffering". If you want to cure a headache, you should first know that
you have a headache, and then secondly you should understand the cause of the
headache. The Third Noble Truth is the cessation of suffering or nirodha (gokpey
denpa). It's a bit like saying that you have to know that you only have a
headache, not that you are your headache. This is quite clever, as we normally
think we should talk in terms of know the headache, know the cause of
headache, and then apply the medicine to cure the headache. But it doesn't
come like that. The fact is that you are not your headache. Your headache is
temporary, and not your absolute nature. It is not your reality, not your Buddha-
nature, and because of that, the path to the cessation of the headache is
possible, and there is a path.
The fact is that you are
not your headache. It is
not your absolute nature,
and because of that it is
possible to cure it
Enlightenment has the
quality of wisdom, in two
aspects: knowing things
as they are, and knowing
them in their multiplicity
and diversity
The next quality of enlightenment, which is described in the same stanza, is the
quality of wisdom. This has two aspects. The first is the 'wisdom that knows
phenomena in all their multiplicity and diversity' (jinyeypey kyenpey yeshey). The
second is the 'wisdom that knows phenomena as they are' itawey kyenpey
yeshey).
The wisdom of knowing
things in their multiplicity
and diversity is different
from how many religions
talk about their god
The wisdom of knowing
things in their multiplicity
is only possible because
this multiplicity of
phenomena doesn't truly
exist
The first aspect of wisdom, for both the being and the state, knows everything,
like the number of leaves on a certain tree growing in a certain place somewhere
in South America. I have to clarify something here, as this wisdom is slightly
different from the way many religions talk about how their God knows
everything. Here, when talk about a location somewhere in South America, on a
particular mountain, and in the middle of this mountain there's a small tree six
feet tall with 200 leaves and all of that - when we talk like this, we are talking
about a mental projection. For someone who can accept that everything is
mind's projection, then this wisdom is acceptable. But if all things truly exist
externally, independent from your mind, then this God or Buddha or whoever it is
must bring a notebook and note down everything everywhere, including how
many leaves this tree has, so in case one day somebody might ask him, he can
immediately answer. In our very limited and small minds, we are shocked when
we read words like “phenomena in their multiplicity", as it's an infinite quantity,
number and amount of detail. But because this multiplicity of phenomena
doesn't truly exist, this kind of wisdom is possible.
With the wisdom of
knowing the nature of
things, Buddha has no
conceptual thoughts
The second aspect is the wisdom that knows the nature of things. When we talk
about the first kind of wisdom, that Buddha knows everything, we feel that we
are talking about conceptual thoughts like numbers, colours, all of that. But
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
154



Buddha has no conceptual thoughts. Let me put it this way, without the second
wisdom, the first cannot exist. You would still have the problem of phenomena
being conceptual, and needing to write everything down in a notebook. But the
second wisdom knows the nature of phenomena. And what is the nature of
phenomena? The nature of phenomena is that there is no such thing as
multiplicity. There are no different kinds of categories. And because Buddha
also has that wisdom, Buddha does not have conceptual thoughts. This is quite
important to understand, as it will clarify some common misunderstandings.
For example, if you are praying to the Buddha you might wonder if he will
understand what you are praying for. Yes, he will know. But because of the
second kind of wisdom that knows phenomena as they are, there is no such
thing as you, your prayer, the cause of your prayer or the result of your prayer -
none of these truly exist. So Buddha does not have to categorise which prayers
need a more urgent response. I'm sure some of you are itching to ask what
happened when Brahma asked Shakyamuni Buddha to teach. How did that
happen? Or when Shakyamuni Buddha was asked certain questions, he didn't
answer. It looks like he has a choice, and can answer some but not others, so
why is that? We'll explain this later.
Buddha's wisdom has no
defilements or fixation, so
he sees in a completely
different way from us.
Because he has no defilements (nyöndrip), he has no grasping or fixation
(chakpa). So when his wisdom enters an object (let's say 'enters' for the sake of
communication), when he sees something, he sees it but he's not fixating on this
object. It's totally different from what we see. Basically, his gaze does not settle
there. It will not grasp and dwell there. When you have defilements you
voluntarily fixate on something. That's what you want. All our defilements want
to fixate, not knowing that by fixating on things, you become very limited, so
that eventually no lotuses will cover your lake.
We have defilements and
fixation and we become
very limited, so no lotuses
will cover our lake
Buddha has no cognitive
obscurations, so he has
no concept of agent,
object and action
And because he has no obscurations to omniscience, no cognitive obscurations
(sheydrip), he doesn't have the concept of agent, object and action. And that's
what we call “no obstruction". When you have cognitive obscurations, even if you
don't want to fixate, you get stuck and blocked with that kind of obscuration.
Shravakayana
practitioners mainly want
to remove defilements, as
these are the cause of
samsara
Defilements and cognitive obscurations are closely related, but defilements are
the direct cause of samsara. This is discussed in many Mahayana shastras
because, for instance, Shravakayana practitioners mainly want to get rid of the
first kind of defilements, as their aim is to get out of samsara. They don't have
an aim that's greater than that. Whereas Bodhisattvas have a much bigger
agenda, so removing cognitive obscurations and not being blocked is so
important to them.
Bodhisattvas have a
greater aim, so they also
want to remove cognitive
obscurations
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
155



203
ཤེས་བྱའི་སྒྲིབ་ཀུན་དགུ་བའི་ཕྱིར། །
ཐམས་ཅད་དུ་ནི་ཐོགས་པ་མེད། །
གཉིས་མེད་ལས་སུ་རུང་བའི ཕྱིར། །
རྩུབ་པའི་རེག་དང་བྲལ་བ་ཡིན། །
Unhindered always, since the obscurations to knowledge have been purified, free from
coarse sensations, being without the two and highly-suited,
Since the veil of the hindrances to knowledge is cleansed, it is in all ways unobstructed
(with regard to the complete insight). Being free from its two fobstacles, it is suited for
samadhiand thus relieved from the touch of coarse objects of contact.
The Buddha has no
agitation and no dullness,
so he has no harsh
sensations
He has no agitation and no dullness. That's why his wisdom is workable or
malleable. And because there is no dullness and no agitation, there are no harsh
sensations. These stanzas are all trying to explain something that's almost
impossible to explain. But they are trying hard. Let me give you an example. We
look at this tent, and every time we look at it, there is a harsh sensation. Because
the fact is that we have to look at it, and that we have to have some kind of a
sense that it is a tent and not soup, and that's a harsh sensation. So for us, we
have to concentrate, and that concentration is a harsh sensation. We have to
really concentrate, and not wander around. And every time we try to do that, we
either get agitated or we get dull, so the result is that every time we have even a
slight cognition, even a very short glimpse of an object, it is a harsh sensation.
But for us, we are so calloused and jaded that even though it's a harsh sensation
we don't feel it, because we are so numb. This is why some people here in the
audience need a cheese grater to turn them on!
204
དེ་གཟུགས་མེད་ཕྱིར་བལྟར་མེད་དེ། །
མཚན་མ་མེད་ཕྱིར་གཟུང་དུ་མེད། I
དགེ་བ་རང་བཞིན་དག་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
དྲི་མེད་དྲི་མ་སྤངས་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
invisible, since it is formless, imperceptible, because it has no characteristic,
wholesome, since its nature is pure and immaculate, all impurities being removed.
Since it is not something visible, it cannot be seen. Since it is free from features, it
cannot be grasped. It is virtuous, (the Dharmadhatul being by nature pure and it is free
from stains, since pollution is abandoned.
Enlightenment has no
form or characteristics. It
is virtuous and stainless,
because it is primordially
pure and temporary stains
can be eliminated
Enlightenment cannot be perceived by the eyes because it doesn't have form. In
many sutras, like the Lankavatara-sutra, Buddha said "those who see me as a
form, they have wrong view". We might think that even if he is formless there
must at least be something that we can refer to. But there is no reference to
grasp onto, because there are no extremes, and there are no marks or
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
156



characteristics (tsenma). Therefore no mind or no cognition can grasp it. But it's
virtuous, because it's primordially pure. And it can be referred to as stainless,
because you can eliminate the temporary stains. Now it will all be explained
once again, this time in terms of the three kayas separately. First the
dharmakaya.
205
ཐོག་མ་དབུས་མཐའ་མེད་ཅིང་རྣམ་དབྱེར་མེད། །
གཉིས་མེད་གསུམ་བྲལ་དྲི་མེད་རྣམ་རྟོག་མེད། །
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་རང་བཞིན་གང་ཡིན་དེ་རྟོགས་པ།
མཉམ་པར་བཞག་པའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ་ཡིས་མཐོང་། །
Beginningless, centreless and endless, completely indivisible, free from the two, free
from the three, stainless and concept-free - such is the Dharmadhatu. Understanding of
its nature is the vision of the yogin who abides in meditation.
What is the nature of Dharmadhatu? It is without beginning, middle and end. It is
totally indivisible and far away from the two {extremes), rid of the three (veils),
unpolluted and not an object of thought. Iis realization is the vision of a Yogi who
Dwells in Meditative Equipoise.
Enlightenment has no
beginning, middle or end.
The concept 'three kayas'
is a relative imputation:
they are inseparable
There is no birth, so there is no beginning. There is no abiding, so there is no
middle. There is no cessation, so there is no end. And these three (no
beginning, no middle, and no end) are inseparable. Even the concept 'three
kayas' is only imputed on a relative level. In reality, these three kayas are
inseparable. There is no such thing as three kayas. Since there is no stain and
no conception, it's luminous. I think you can understand this if you can
understand what we discussed earlier, that there is no fixation and no
obstruction (chaktok dralwa). Having no fixation and no obstruction is actually
the essence luminosity. But ordinary people cannot understand this. Only a
yogi in his meditative state can see it.
Having no fixation or
obstruction is the essence
of luminosity, but only a
yogi can realise this
206
གཞལ་མེད་གང་གཱའི་བྱེ་མ་ལས་འདས་པ།
བསམ་མེད་མཉམ་མེད་ཡོན་ཏན་རྣམས་དང་ལྡན། །
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་དྲི་མེད་དབྱིངས་དེ་ནི། །
བག་ཆགས་བཅས་པའི་ཉེས་པ་རྣམ་སྤངས་པའོ། །
Unfathomable and greater in number, than the sand-grains of the Ganga, inconceivable
and unequalled are the qualities of the inmaculate space of the tathagatas - purged of
every defect and related conditioning.
The unpolluted sphere of a tathagata possesses the four] qualities of realization. It
cannot be fathomed and (in number} is beyond the grains of sand in the river Ganges.
It is inconceivable and peerless and there is furthermore elimination of all faults along
with their remaining traces.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
157



The dharmakaya has five
qualities:
This dharmakaya has five qualities:
1) immeasurable
(1) Immeasurable: It is immeasurable because it's very big. It's vast. You have
to understand this in terms of the context we talked about earlier. Our
measurement is in terms of centimetres, feet, inches, miles and kilometres.
We have certain tools, and with these we cannot measure it.
2) Innumerable
(2) Innumerable: The second quality is interesting, because it answers the
question about whether everyone has a single Buddha-nature or whether
there are lots of individual Buddha-natures. You can't really say that both are
true. First of all, as we just heard, it cannot be measured. And now it says it
is infinite in number, more than the grains of sand of the river Ganga.
3) Inconceivable
(3) Inconceivable: It is profound. Therefore it is inconceivable. There is no mind
or cognition, no cognizer that can conceive of emptiness. It cannot be
fathomed because within this boundary there is no fathomer than can fathom
it. That's how you have to understand this. It's inconceivable because there
is no conceiver. Our conceiver is very crippled or handicapped, and needs a
lot of the cheese grater. It only has one way of knowing things, which is
inferring, and that's all we have. It's a very pathetic and limited way of
knowing things. It's like going to Rome and speaking only two words of
Italian, and not having any hands. That's how we are!
4) Uncommon
(4) Uncommon: There is no other entity or phenomenon that can equal this
dharmakaya, that's why it's uncommon.
5) Pure
(5) Pure: Right from the beginning, it is primordially free from all the defilements
and their propensities. That's why it's pure.
These are the five qualities of the dharmakaya. Next comes the sambhogakaya.
207
སྣ་ཚོགས་དམ་ཆོས་འོད་ཟེར་མངའ་བའི་སྐུས། 1
འགྲོ་བའི་རྣམ་གྲོལ་དོན་གྲུབ་ལ་བརྩོན་པ། །
མཛད་པ་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུའི་རྒྱལ་བཞིན་ཏེ། ། !
སྣ་ཚོགས་དངོས་ཀྱང་དེ་ཡི་རང་བཞིན་མིན། །
By various facets of the true Dharma, through its radiant embodiments and diligence in
accomplishing its aim of liberating beings, its deeds are like those of a king of wishing-
gems. Although having different "substantial" forms, it is not really of such character.
Through various aspects of the sacred Dharma, through bodies shot with light rays and
through readiness to accomplish the task of the total liberation of beings, its deeds
resemble the activity of a king of wishfulfilling jewels. fit appears as a variety of things,
yet is not of the nature of these
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
158



The sambhogakaya also has five qualities:
The sambhogakaya has
five qualities:
1) Infinite speech, which
is dharma
2) Form with major and
minor marks
3) Diligence and
compassion
4) Benefits without
conception
5) Appears in many
forms, but none is him
1) He has infinite, or numerous, speech, which is none other than the holy
Dharma.
2) He has a form with major and minor marks, which is perceivable now.
3) With his mind, he is ever diligent and compassionate, to benefit sentient
beings.
4) Although he has a mind that wishes to benefit sentient beings, he doesn't
have conception. He benefits beings like a wishfulfilling jewel.
5) He appears in many different ways or forms, but none of them is really him.
This really describes the nature of our mind so well. Now we come to the
nirmanakaya.
208
འཇིག་རྟེན་ཞི་བའི་ལམ་ལ་འཇུག་པ་དང་། །
རབ་ཏུ་སྨིན་དང་ལུང་སྟོན་རྒྱུ་ཡི་གཟུགས། །
གང་ཡིན་དེ་ཡང་འདིར་ནི་རྟག་གནས་ཏེ།
ནམ་མཁའི་ཁམས་སུ་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཁམས་བཞིན་ནོ། ། |
The form aspects are the cause, establishing worldlings on the path to peace, maturing
them and predicting. Moreover these worlds by their presence are ever graced, just as
the element of form ever abides in that of space.
[The nirmanakaya persuades} the worldly beings to enter the path towards peace. He
fully matures them and granting prophecy becomes the cause of their release]. These
form (kayas) remain forever in this world] like the realm of form within the realm of
space.
The nirmanakaya appears
continuously in samsara
to benefit sentient beings
What does the nirmanakaya do? In the beginning he tries to encourage samsaric
beings to enter the path of the Shravakayana nirvana. And then in the middle he
tries to ripen all the sentient beings within the path of the Mahayana. And then
at the end he will predict that the Bodhisattva who is on the path will reach
enlightenment at a certain time and place, and so on and so forth. This kind of
nirmanakaya will also appear on this earth or in this samsara all the time,
continuously, in the same way that all the elements of form appear within space
at all times. This will be explained again, but first there is once again a
summary.
209
རང་བྱུང་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད་ཅེས་གང་བརྗོད་པ། །
མཆོག་ཏུ་མྱ་ངན་འདས་བསམ་མེད། ། 1
དགྲ་བཅོམ་སོ་སོའི་བདག་གྱུར་པ། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
159



That called "the omniscience of the self-existent", "Buddhahood", "supreme nirvana",
"inconceivability", "victory over the enemy" and "the own-nature"
The Omniscience of All the Self-Sprung Ones is given the name of "Buddhahood." Its
meaning is also termed): “Most Supremely Beyond Torment", "The Inconceivable",
"Foe-Vanquisher", and "Quintessence of Self-Awareness".
There are many different
terms used to refer to
changchub, Buddha or
entightenment
"Self-arising, all-knowing wisdom", "the Buddha", "the supreme enlightenment",
* that which ordinary persons or conceivers cannot conceive", "the supreme
destroyer of all the enemies or defilements", and "that which can be only
perceived by self-awareness" - all these are different names referring to one and
only one thing: enlightenment (changchub).
210
དེ་དབྱེ་ཟབ་དང་རྒྱུ་ཆེ་དང་། །
བདག་ཉིད་ཆེན་པོའི་ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི། །
ཆོས་ཀྱིས་རབ་ཕྱེ་རང་བཞིན་ལ། །
སོགས་པའི་སྐུ་གསུམ་དག་གིས་འཇུག
1
is categorized according to its qualities of profoundness, vastness and magnanimity,
through the essence kaya and so on-the kayas three.
When these are categorized, they can be fully divided into three) properties, which are
the qualities of depth, vastness and greatness or the nature {kayal and so on. {The
benefits) are fulfilled through these three kayas.
These can be categorised
into three: vast, profound
and supreme being, which
correspond to three kayas
All these can be categorised into three: profound, vast and supreme being. And
therefore we categorise them into three kayas or bodies. That's the summary.
211
དེ་ལ་སངས་རྒྱས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ནི། ། 1
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་སྐུ་མཚན་ཉིད་ལྔ། །
མདོར་ན་ཡོན་ཏན་ལྔ་དང་ནི། །
ལྡན་བཞིན་དུ་རིག་པར་གྱུ །
Of these, the Buddhas' essence-kaya should be known as that which has the five
intrinsic characteristics and, when put concisely, five qualities.
Of these, the svabhavikakaya of the Buddhas is to be known as having five
characteristics and if condensed, five qualities:
The three kayas possess
five different qualities
Again, this is another summary before it will be explained in an extended way.
These three kayas all possess five different kinds of characters and qualities.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
160



2༔2
འདུས་མ་བྱས་ཤིང་རྣམ་དབྱེར་མེད། །
མཐའ་གཉིས་དག་ནི་རྣམ་པར་སྤངས། །
ཉོན་མོངས་ཤེས་བྱ་སྙོམས་འཇུག་གི །
སྒྲིབ་གསུམ་ལས་ནི་ངེས་གྲོལ་ཏེ། །
It is uncreated and indivisible, utierly purged, purified of the two extremes, definitely
liberated from the obscurations three – the defilements, ideational knowledge and
blockages to meditative mastery:
It is uncreated and totally indivisible. The two extremes are completely abandoned it
is definitively freed from the three veils - the mental poisons and the obscurations to
knowledge and meditative equipoise.
23
དྲི་མེད་རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་མེད་དང་། །
རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་ཡིན་ཕྱིར། །
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ནི།
དག་པའི་ཕྱིར་ན་འོད་གསལ་བ། །
Stainless, completely beyond concept, and through being the domain of the Yogi, and
through the Dharmadhatu being, essentially, pure, it is clarity.
It is unpolluted and not an (object of thought. Being the field of the yogis and the
Dharmadhatu, being by essence pure, it is luminous clarity.
Why dharmakaya is
uncompounded, stainless
and luminous
Why is dharmakaya uncompounded? Because it doesn't have birth, dwelling and
cessation. You cannot distinguish it in the context of birth, dwelling and
cessation. We cannot say it is born, it is dwelling, or it is ceasing. Nor can
dharmakaya be distinguished in the context of one or separate. It doesn't have
self and the possessions of the self. It doesn't have any of these defilements,
and it doesn't have any obscuration that is not a defilement, which refers to the
cognitive obscurations. Also dharmakaya doesn't have the meditative
obscurations. Therefore it is stainless. It has no conceptions. Only yogis during
their meditative state can perceive it. It is primordially pure, or primordially free
from all kinds of extremes, therefore it is luminous.
234
གཞལ་མེད་གྲངས་མེད་བསམ་མེད་པ། །
མཉམ་མེད་དག་པའི་མཐར་ཐུག་པའི། །
ཡོན་ཏན་རྣམས་དང་ཡང་དག་པར།
ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ལྡན་ཏེ། །
The svabhavikakaya is truly endowed with the qualities of immeasurability,
unaccountability, inconceivability, incomparability and ultimate purity.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
161



The svabhavikakaya truly has the final and ultimate qualities of being unfathomable,
countless, inconceivable, unequalled and pure.
24
རྒྱ་ཆེའི་ཕྱིར་དང་གྲངས་མེད་ཕྱིར། །
རྟོག་གེའི་ཡུལ་ནི་མིན་ཕྱིར་དང་
། །
འབའ་ཞིག་བག་ཆགས་བཅས་སྤང་ཕྱིར།
གཞལ་མེད་ལ་སོགས་གོ་རིམས་བཞིན། །
It is respectively immeasurable and so on because it is vast, immeasurable, beyond the
scope of intellectual speculation, unique and rid of even the conditioning.
Since it is vast, not to be numbered, not an object of reasoning and unique, and since
the remaining traces are eliminated, it is in the same order unfathomable and so on.
Why dharmakaya is
immeasurable etc: a
repetition of the qualities
of the dharmakaya
Dharmakaya is immeasurable, because it's vast. It cannot be counted, because
it's innumerable. It cannot be perceived or conceived, because it's not an object
of analysis. It is unique or uncommon because only the Buddha has it. It has the
most supreme quality of purity, because all obscurations are purified. This has
been an extended repetition of the explanation of the qualities of the
dharmakaya. Now we come to the sambhogakaya again.
23 6
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཆོས་ལ་རྫོགས་ལོངས་སྤྱོད། །
རང་བཞིན་ཆོས་ནི་སྣང་ཕྱིར་དང་། }
ཐུགས་རྗེ་དག་པའི་རྒྱུ་མཐུན་པ། །
འགྲོ་དོན་རྒྱུན་མི་འཆད་ཕྱིར་དང་
། །
It takes the form of perfect expression because: it uses perfectly the various Dharmas, it
manifests real attributes and has uninterrupted activity to benefit beings, being the
natural outflow of pure compassion,
It perfectly enjoys the various aspects of Dharma and appears [in the form of natural
qualities. Corresponding to the pure cause of its compassion, the benefit of sentient
beings is uninterrupted.
2?
རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་མེད་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་པར། །
འདོད་པ་ཇི་བཞིན་ཡོངས་སྐོང་ཕྱིར། །
ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུའི་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱིས། །
རྫོགས་པར་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྣམ་པར་གནས།
།
it completely, exactly, fulfils aspirations, spontaneously and without conceptual
agitation, and because it has miraculous abilities like those of the gem fulfilling all
wishes.
.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
162



Totally without any thought and spontaneously it wholly grants all wishes exactly as
they are by miraculous powers, like a wishfulfilling gem. It therefore tully abides in
Perfect Enjoyment.
The qualities of the
sambhogakaya are not
just symbolic. They are
naturally present
The sambhogakaya has
unobstructed compassion
without conception or
intention to benefit
beings, like a jewel that
reflects different colours
The speech enjoys the wealth of the infinite greater path. And the form of the
sambhogakaya, including its characteristics such as the 32 major marks, is not
just symbolic. It is not just a manifestation. These qualities are naturally there.
And it has unobstructed compassion, which reflects as unobstructed action to
benefit sentient beings. Meanwhile, all this time there is not a single conception.
There is no such thing as intention or planning to benefit sentient beings.
Everything is spontaneously accomplished. It is like a wishfulfilling jewel.
According to Khun Rinpoche, we can understand this jewel as being like a
diamond, in the sense that it reflects different colours depending on where you
place it, but none of these colours is its own nature.
218
བརྗོད་སྟོན་མཛད་རྒྱུན་མི་འཆད་དང་། །
མངོན་པར་འདུ་བྱེད་མེད་པ་དང་། །
དེ་ཡི་ངོ་བོ་མིན་སྟོན་ལ། །
འདིར་ནི་སྣ་ཚོགས་རྣམ་ལྔར་སྟོན། །
It is being shown here in lacets five - its uninterrupted speech, emanation and deeds,
these being absolutely uncontrived and it manifesting not its true identity.
Since the stream of verbal expression, display ſof form) and action for mind) is
uninterrupted and not a product, and since it shows that it is not of the essence of
these, it is taught here in five aspects, as "various" and so on.
The sambhogakaya has
five qualities: speech,
form, unobstructed
compassion, unintended
action and manifestation
These are the five qualities of the sambhogakaya. Basically the sambhogakaya's
qualities are speech, form, unobstructed compassion, unintended action, and the
ability to manifest in many different forms, none of which is his real form. This
explanation of form continues.
219
ཇི་ལྟར་ཚོན་ནི་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས། །
ནོར་བུ་དེ་དངོས་མིན་རྩྭང་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་འགྲོ་རྐྱེན་སྣ་ཚོགས་པས།
ཁྱབ་བདག་དེ་དངོས་མིན་པར་སྣང་།
1
just as a gem is actually not the various hues it can pick up, so likewise the all-
embracing is not the way it appears to be due to situations of various beings.
Due to the various colours for its background a gem appears in manifold colours), [but)
is not a thing fulfilling their function. Likewise the All-Pervasive [Ones) appear due to
the manifold conditions (set by beings without being a thing fulfilling their functions.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
163



Just as a clear jewel
reflects the colour of its
surroundings without
changing colour, beings
will see the form of the
sambhogakaya according
to their aspirations
This is again a repetition. Depending on where you place it, a clear jewel
changes its colour according to different kinds of wrapping like red silk, blue
silk, or yellow silk. But in reality the jewel itself hasn't changed colour. Likewise
because of the different intention, devotion, and aspiration of different sentient
beings, they will see the form of the sambhogakaya in different ways. But the
sambhogakaya himself hasn't changed. Now we come to the nirmanakaya, again
with an extensive explanation.
22]
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོས་འཇིག་རྟེན་མཁྱེན། །
འཇིག་རྟེན་ཀུན་ལ་གཟིགས་ནས་ནི། །
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ལས་མ་གཡོས་པར། །
སྤྲུལ་པའི་རང་བཞིན་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས། །
Through greatest compassion knowing all worlds, having seen all worlds, whilst never
leaving the dharmakaya, through various forms, apparitional by nature, the one
excellently born into the highest birth
The Supreme nirmanakaya) knows the world and having gazed upon all worldly
beings demonstrates out of his great compassion (twelve wondrous deeds]. Without
moving away from the dharmakaya he manifests through various aspects of an illusory
nature. Having (first) been bom spontaneously in a divinei existence
221
ལྟ་བ་མངོན་པར་སྐྱེ་བ་དང་། །
དགའ་ལྡན་གནས་ནས་འཕོ་བ་དང་། །
ལྷུམས་སུ་འཇུག་དང་བལྟམས་པ་དང་། །
བཟོ་ཡི་གནས་ལ་མཁས་པ་དང་། །
Descends from that "Realm of Great Joy", enters the royal womb and is nobly born on
Earth. Perfectly skilled in every science and craft,
He then leaves the realm of Tushita and passes [into this world. He enters this
mother's womb, takes birth and gains perfect skill, mastering all the various fields of
handicraft, science and art,
222
བཙུན་མོའི་འཁོར་དགྱེས་རོལ་པ་དང་། །
ངེས་འབྱུང་དཀའ་བ་སྤྱོད་པ་དང་
། །
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྙིང་པོར་གཤེགས་པ་དང་། །
བདུད་སྡེ་འཇོམས་དང་རྫོགས་པར་ནི།
Delighting in his royal consorts' company, renouncing, practising the path of difficulty,
going to the place called “Enlightenment's Very Heart", he vanquishes the hosts of
Mara.
.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
164



He mirthfully enjoys amusement among his spouse and her retinue. Feeling weariness
and renunciation he practises as an ascetic. Then he goes to Awakening's Heart and
defeats the hosts of Mara.
223
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་དང་། 1
མྱ་ངན་འདས་པར་གཤེགས་མཛད་རྣམས། །
ཡོངས་སུ་མ་དག་ཞིང་རྣམས་སུ།
1
སྲིད་པ་ཇི་སྲིད་གནས་པར་སྟོན། 1
Then, perfect enlightenment, he turns the wheel of Dharma and passes into nirvana – in
all those places, so impure, the nirmanakaya shows these deeds as long as worlds
endure.
[He finds perfeci enlightenment and turns the wheel of Dharma. He passes into
nirvana (the state beyond any torment and paint. Within all the fendless fields totally
infested with impurity he shows these deeds as long as beings abide in existence.
The nirmanakaya is a
show that happens in the
impure realm and
continues as long as
samsara exists
The last word of stanza 223 is quite important. It is tön, which means 'show'. So
now there's a show. Where is this show happening, in which theatre?
Penultimate line of 223: in the impure realm. Now we are talking about
nirmanakaya. This is the theatre. And for how long does show go on? The last
word of the last line: for as long as samsara exists. As long as samsara exists,
the show will go on.
The Buddha gives people
what they want and what
they need, both together
Who is going to show this? Who is directing this, who is producing this? Second
part of first line of 220: the "One who knows the world" Vikten Khyenpa). One
who knows what people need and what people want, that's why he is called jikten
chenpa. This is one of the most important qualities of the Buddha. In the Sutra
of Remembering the Triple Gem, it says that he knows what people need and
what people want, and he will give them both. If he only gave people what they
need to hear, then nobody would listen! And if he only gave people what they
want to hear, there's no point. The he would be useless, just a comedian or
entertainer.
He manifests in the world
out of great compassion,
but he never departs from
the dharmakaya
What made him show this? Is he interested in financial gain, or some kind of
award? No! The first word of the first line of 220: he sees the world with great
compassion (thujey chenpo). How will he do it? Will he run around and put on
make up? Will he take the role of an actor sometimes? What's his style? How
will he do it? Third and fourth lines of stanza 220: never departing from the
state of the dharmakaya. He is always sitting on the seat of the dharmakaya,
never moving an inch, and sending all kinds of manifestations.
The real show: the story
of the Buddha's life
according to the common
vehicle
So, what's the real show? He took rebirths as a rabbit, as a monkey, as a bird
and so on, until the last of his rebirths, as a god. At that time, his name in
Sanskrit was Swetaketu, which means 'white tip'. His hair had a white tipped
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
165



jewel, or something like that. And Maitreya knows this very well, because this
Bodhisattva was the one who took off his crown and gave it to Maitreya, saying,
"I'm going to earth". Leaving the god realm, dying from the god realm basically,
and going to earth, entering Mayadevi's womb in the form of an ash-coloured
elephant with six tusks. And after nine months and nine days, or ten days, being
born in the garden of Lumbini. And then studying arts such as writing, reading
and warfare under various tutors. Don't forget, this is all a show. And enjoying
the courtesans and the queens. And having a certain curiosity to go out. And
seeing death and old age, and asking his chariot driver, his chauffeur, "What are
these?" And coming back, depressed. Brooding. And escaping from the palace
and looking for enlightenment. And for that, six years of penance. And then
realising that's not right and stopping the penance. And meeting Sujata, the
cowherd girl. And a grass-seller. And accepting the offerings like grass. And
going under the bodhi tree. And in the evening defeating the maras. And at
dawn, attaining enlightenment. And not wanting to teach.
It's all a show, but every
aspect of the show has a
purpose. It gives sentient
beings what they want
and what they need
And it's amazing! It's all a show. And what is the show for? It's for sentient
beings. He's giving them both what they want and what they need. Every action,
every aspect of his show has a purpose. For example, when he didn't want to
teach - what did that do? It caused sentient beings like Brahma and Indra to
come down and ask him to teach. By doing so, they created merit. It's amazing
compassion!
And then he turns the wheel of the Dharma three times, and at the end, in
Kushinagar, under two sal trees he passes into Parinirvana. That's how the show
goes on, all the time, until the end of samsara.
224
མི་རྟག་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བདག་མེད་དང་
། ། !
རྒ་བའི་སྐུ་ཡིས་ཐབས་མཁྱེན་པས། ། !
སེམས་ཅན་སྲིད་གསུམ་སྐྱོ་བསྐྱེད་ནས། །
མྱ་ངན་འདས་ལ་རབ་འཇུག་མཛད།
Knowing the means (through such terms as “impermanence", "suffering", "non self"
and "peace"), the nirmanakaya instils weariness with the world in beings of the three
dimensions, thereby causing them to apply themselves to suffering's transcendence.
With the words "impermanent," "suffering," "selfless" and "peace" (the Buddhas) who
know all means persuade sentient beings to generate weariness with the three realms of
existence and to fully enter into the state beyond torment and pain.
Again we continue with the activity of the nirmanakaya Buddha. Since
nirmanakaya is a show, what is his activity? This is explained in stanzas 224-
226. Stanza 224 is so beautiful! I'm so proud of it. When we talk about activity,
we judge people by their actions. We say somebody is good because of what he
did, and that's what's happening here. We are talking about his activity. And the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
166



The nirmanakaya's
activity is to make four
sounds, the four seals:
reason why I'm proud of this stanza is that one might think Buddha were great if
he could fly, if he went inside the earth, if he fed thousands of people or things
like that. But instead of that, here we have four incredible activities. And these
activities are sounds. He made four sounds, though they are not moaning or
hiccups! The four noises or sounds he made are:
- Impermanence
- Pain
- No self
- No extremes
All compounded things are impermanent
All defilements (sakchey) are pain
All phenomena have no self
Enlightenment has no extremes
It's just a show, so he's
making sounds
I like the choice of word 'sound' (dra), as he's an actor. Instead of saying, "he
talked", the text says, "He made four sounds". If we say he talked then it
becomes slightly more personal. But it's just a show, so he's just making some
sounds. Maybe we should change the translation to 'sound' instead of 'word'.
225
ཞི་བའི་ལམ་ལ་རབ་ཞུགས་པ། །
མྱ་ངན་འདས་ཐོབ་འདུ་ཤེས་ཅན། །
དམ་ཆོས་པདྨ་དཀར་ལ་སོགས། །
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དེ་ཉིད་བསྟན་པ་ཡིས། །
To those excellently established on the path of peace, who believe themselves nirvana
to have reached, he teaches the thatness of all phenomena in “The White Lotus of
Dharma" and others,
Those who have perfectly followed the path of peace believe that they have attained
the state of nirvana. By the White Lotus of Dharma Sutra and similar aspects of his
sacred teaching he explains the nature of phenomena.
By making these sounds,
Buddha encourages
sentient beings to follow
the path, and Shravakas
and Pratyekabuddhas to
demolish their clinging to
enlightenment
So what does he do? He first makes sentient beings feel sad about samsara, by
making these noises. And then he makes sentient beings enter the path of
nirvana. And for beings that have entered the path of nirvana but not yet
achieved the absolute nirvana, such as Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, in places
like the Pundarika-sutra he teaches that there is only one vehicle and only one
essence. With these teachings, audiences such as the Shravakas will demolish
their clinging to enlightenment. Earlier they had been thinking that the state of
Arhat is the final enlightenment, but now they will get rid of that kind of clinging.
226
དེ་དག་ལྔར་འཛིན་ལས་བཟློག་སྟེ། །
ཐབས་དང་ཤེས་རབ་ཡོངས་བཟུང་བས། །
ཐེག་པ་མཆོག་ལ་སྨིན་མཛད་དེ། །
བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་ཏུ་ལུང་བསྟན་ཏོ། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
167



Wherefore they turn away from their former belief and, inspired to well adopt wisdom
and skilful means, he brings them to maturity in the highest yana and predicts their
enlightenment supreme.
Thus he causes them to refrain from their former belief, to fully adopt skilful means and
discriminating wisdom, and gain maturity on the path of the supreme vehicle. Then he
grants them prophecy of their supreme enlightenment.
With wisdom and
compassion he leads
beings out of samsara
and nirvana, and then he
predicts their final
enlightenment
So, with wisdom he will make them not dwell in samsara. And with compassion,
he will make them not dwell in nirvana. And he will predict to these audiences
that they will reach enlightenment beyond samsara and nirvana. Now we come
to the conclusion.
227
ཟབ་དང་མཐུ་ནི་ཕུན་ཚོགས་དང་། །
བྱིས་པའི་དོན་མཐུན་རབ་འདྲེན་ཕྱིར། །
འདི་དག་གྲངས་བཞིན་ཟབ་པ་དང་། 1
རྒྱ་ཆེ་བདག་ཉིད་ཆེ་ཞེས་བྱ། །
Being profound, the very best of all powers and cleverest guidance for the immature
according to their specific needs, these are respectively known as “the deep", "the vast"
and "the great by nature".
Since these kayas constitute depth, best possible power and supreme guidance in tune
with the aims of the children, they should be known in accordance with this number as
being deep, vast and the embodiment of greatness.
Dharmakaya is profound,
sambhogakaya is vast,
and nirmanakaya is
shown to benefit and
liberate sentient beings
Dharmakaya is profound, deep, and difficult for an ordinary perceiver to
conceive. That's why it's called profound. For different beings he can manifest
the sambhogakaya in all kinds of manifestations. He has all the attributes to
manifest, but he is not that. And for the sake of the children, for the naïve and
uncultivated, nirmanakaya is shown. And the purpose of showing this is to
benefit and liberate them.
228
འདིར་ནི་དང་པོ་ཆོས་སྐུ་སྟེ། །
ཕྱི་མ་དག་ནི་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྐུ། །
ནམ་མཁའ་ལ་ནི་གཟུགས་གནས་བཞིན། །
དང་པོ་ལ་ནི་ཐ་མ་གནས། །
The first of the above is the dharmakaya whilst the latter are the form kayas. Just as
forms abide in space, the latter abide in the former.
Here the first is the dharmakaya, and the latter are the form kayas. As the visible abides
in space, the latter abides in the first.
This explains how the three kayas correspond to each other, or how they exist so
to speak. Even though there is no hierarchy among the three kayas, for the sake
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment 168



Although the three kayas
are one, we can say that
dharmakaya is like a
container for all forms,
and sambhogakaya and
nirmanakaya are contents
of explanation, we describe the dharmakaya as a container, like the sky or space
can be referred to as a container containing all forms, and the sambhogakaya
and nirmanakaya as contents.
Day 3 - Introduction
Your motivation as you
listen to these teachings
should be for you and all
beings to attain these
qualities
To be attracted to the
teachings rather than
worldly gains requires
devotion. There are three
kinds of devotion:
As you listen to all these qualities and characteristics of the Buddha that we have
heard and we will hear, your primary motivation should be to listen to this so that
these qualities will actually be attained not only by yourself, but also by all
sentient beings. I can't stress this enough. And in order to do that, you must
become attracted to the qualities of the Buddha. And for that, you must not be
attracted to other things, such as all the so-called worldly gains, happiness, glory
and wealth. You must again and again remind yourself that all those are futile.
Your main motivation should be a strong longing for this Buddha, for yourself
and for others. And therefore we are talking amount a certain amount of
devotion. Even Buddha himself says the absolute truth can only be realised
through devotion. And although there's nothing in the text about this, I like to
talk about three kinds of devotion:
1) Irrational devotion,
such as wrapping your
penis with cotton before
blowing yourself up
1) First there's irrational devotion, such as devoting yourself to someone with
madness, with complete stupidity. You are so devoted to this person or this
particular path that you will go through amazing stupidity, such as wrapping
your penis with cotton before you blow yourself up, so when you reach heaven
you can use that tool in order to enjoy certain virgins. It's so stupid to wrap it
when you're going to blow yourself up, as your whole body will be blown up! Yet
you try to keep this part intact, so that as you take your next breath you can
enjoy, I think, 74 virgins. And they are not even infinite virgins! When you are
done with one, then there are only 73 left, and that's suffering. I should be
careful! I keep on forgetting I'm in France. Anyway, that's what we call irrational
devotion.
2) Rational devotion,
which is trust in cause,
condition and effect, and
which is taught for most
of the Buddhist path
2) Then there's rational devotion, which is generally taught for most of the
Buddhist path. This is based on the belief or trust in cause, condition and result.
As I often say, it's like cooking an egg. If you have all the necessary causes and
conditions, then you know the egg will be cooked, even if you pray that it won't
be cooked. Most of the so-called practice of devotion in Buddhism is based on
that. Even the inspiration to eliminate temporary or removable defilements is
very much based on rational devotion, because you know that the dirt, the
defilements, are caused and conditioned, so they are temporary. And based on
that rationale we have trust that they can be removed. Similarly, when you know
that everything is mind, you know that the only thing for you to do is tame your
mind and train your mind. Therefore you should do shamatha and vipashyana,
and all this is based on rational devotion.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
169



3) Beyond-rational
devotion, which is not
irrational, and is required
to comprehend the
inconceivable qualities of
the Buddha that are
beyond our rationality
3) There is a third, beyond rational devotion that we should all aspire to have.
It's beyond rational devotion, but it is not irrational. Without this kind of
devotion, we will find it very difficult to comprehend everything that we talked
about yesterday and all the things we are going to talk about today. Because as 1
said yesterday, the moment you hear the name 'Buddha', you have a certain
image in your head, especially if you are a Buddhist. You think of someone who
is extraordinary, but only extraordinary, as if he becomes beyond extraordinary,
we cannot conceive of him. The human mind is so complicated! We want our
Buddha to be amazingly beautiful, incredible, and have all kinds of great
qualities. But we cannot fathom 100% perfection. It's just not possible.
We would like the Buddha
to be extraordinary, but
not too extraordinary.
Out of his compassion,
the Buddha gives us both
what we want and what
we need
The way we perceive an excellent or extraordinary being is very fickle. If he is
too good, then we won't like that manifestation. We won't. We need to be able
to identify ourselves with him. This is why some of us can relate to Milarepa's
biography, but not to Guru Rinpoche's biography. How would you like to have a
boyfriend or girlfriend, or a husband or wife, who was born from a hibiscus or a
cabbage? You'd be hiding this partner from others! You wouldn't say, "this is
my boyfriend, he was born from a cabbage". And all this is because we don't
have this beyond-rational devotion. This alone is a great manifestation of
compassion of the Buddha. We talked about how he will give you what you want
and what you need, both together. Ordinary people like us cannot do this. For
example, if you see an alcoholic, he might want alcohol but he doesn't need it.
How are you going to give him what he wants and needs together? We can only
take turns, but he can do it together.
Some Western scholars
seem to believe that
thinking of the Buddha as
a normal human who
suffers just like us makes
him more approachable
I think there are some people nowadays, some scholars, who without realising
these things believe that Buddha has suffering. And I have seen some things
written quite proudly to justify that thesis that Buddha has suffering, that Buddha
has emotion, that Buddha is a human being and so on. I think the author, let's
call him Mr Steve, believes that he's doing a service to the Dharma by writing
this. I have a feeling that he wants to scold the theologians by saying, “your God
is unreachable, but our Buddha is a human, and he sometimes has ups and
downs", things like that.
This kind of confusion
arises because we cannot
conceive that the entire
nirmanakaya is just a
show, a manifestation
I think these people believe that Buddha was upset when there was a schism
within the Sangha, or when he was hit on the toe when Devadatta was throwing
stones and he felt pain, stuff like that. I think that all this, such as thinking that
he actually went through pain is a very human way of thinking. Because what
makes a person extraordinary from a human being's perspective is when he
doesn't have big sufferings. But if he doesn't even have little sufferings, then he
becomes a bit alien and you cannot relate to him. But as long as he doesn't have
the very big sufferings, then this person becomes extraordinary. All this is
because we just cannot conceive that this is all a show, and this is all his
manifestation. Now I have to clarify something here, because when we say, "he's
just manifesting this", it could be understood as saying he's pretending for the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
170



sake of sentient beings. That he pretends in public, and then when all the
disciples go away he goes inside, closes the door and he cries and tends to his
wounds! Basically, we think like that because most of the time we only have
ourselves as reference. So we think this is the only way. We think others must
go through pain because we go through pain.
We must aspire to
beyond-rational devotion
to understand these
qualities of the Buddha
So beyond-rational devotion is really important. We must aspire to have that.
Then we will understand these incredible, deep, vast qualities of the Buddha.
The Buddha's qualities do
not need to be created
We already have them all,
and they are manifesting
all the time, but we
misinterpret this because
of our ignorance
And I have to repeat that all these qualities of the Buddha are not something that
you have to create or manufacture. According to man Nyingmapas and the
Shentongpas in particular, you have them. You have all of them. Your Buddha-
nature has all of these incredible, inconceivable qualities. And when I say that
you have them, you might think, "Oh, I have them, but at the moment they are a
bit like sleeping octopus". Basically, you might think they are not manifesting.
But the amazing thing is they are never sleeping. They never stop. They are
manifesting all the time, even though this gets misinterpreted most of the time
because of our ignorance. So the shastras and even the sutras say that even a
temporary cool breeze is the manifestation of the Buddha. This is not to be
understood as suggesting that there is a group of breeze-creating Buddhas
deciding to send you a cool breeze! For example, if you are hot, thirsty, and
tired, your merit may for a moment manage to interpret a certain phenomenon
as a cool breeze. But if you don't have that merit, you could be engaged in a
heated argument with your wife as the small breeze passes, and there's no
benefit!
Even a cool breeze can be
the manifestation of the
Buddha if we have the
merit to interpret it
The Buddha's actions do
not exhaust or run out.
They are there all the
time, but we don't get it!
The actions of the Buddha do not exhaust or run out. Whether it's a cool breeze
or a beautiful sight of a falling autumn leaf that might inspire you and change
your whole life, these actions do not exhaust. They are happening all the time,
and you are just not getting it! They are not rare. It's not like it only happens in
Kathmandu! Even with a cappuccino, first there is the stage of froth with
chocolate on top, then comes the middle stage when it is post-froth, and then
there is the complete disappearance of whatever you were drinking. There is
continuous manifestation, all the time. And when I say the manifestations of the
Buddha do not run out, you might think it's like a river that's flowing all the time,
something continuous. But 'continuous' is not really the right word, as that
means lots of different kinds of things continuing one after another, a bit like a
mala or rosary with a single string. By contrast, the Buddha is there, basically.
His Holiness Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche uses the example of a crystal, which
refracts lots of rainbow light when you hold it up to the sun. If you hide it for a
thousand years, there is no rainbow. But if after a thousand years you hold it up
to the sun, suddenly all the rainbows are there again. The rainbows don't get
confused. They are already there.
The Buddha is there. It's
like a crystal that will
produce rainbow light
even after it has been
hidden for a thousand
years
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
171



If a falling leaf makes you
think of impermanence,
that's the blessing of the
Buddha. But if it makes
you want to listen to love
songs instead, ignorance
is at work!
If a cool breeze or a falling autumn leaf makes you feel really sad because it
reminds you of impermanence, that's the blessing of the Buddha, right there.
But if it makes you feel melancholic and you want to listen to touchy-feely love
songs, then ignorance is working instead! If a hideous sight of two thighbones
wrapped in a short skirt makes you think of the futility of worldly existence, you
should really go to the Champs-Elysées as often as possible! But if that sight
inspires you to other things, then ignorance is working again. I'm trying to find
some opportunities to refer to Gérard, my usual example. But he has recently
taken the full bhikshu vow, and it's supposedly really bad to make fun of a fully
ordained bhikshu. I'm trying to find a way. Maybe we can talk about his pre-
bhikshu days?
There is no externally
existing manifestation of
an externally existing
Buddha
So, basically, when we talk about the manifestation of the Buddha, please don't
think in terms of an externally existing manifestation of the Buddha. Never think
like that. There's no externally existing Buddha plucking an autumn leaf in front
of you.
229
རྒྱུ་མཐའ་ཡས་དང་སེམས་ཅན་ཟད་མེད་དང་
། །
བརྩེ་དང་འཕྲུལ་དང་མཁྱེན་དང་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ལྡན། 1
ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག་འཆི་བའི་བདུད་བཅོམ་དང་
། ། ]
ངོ་བོ་མེད་ཕྱིར་འཇིག་རྟེན་མགོན་པོས་བརྟག །
Through infinite causes, an inexhaustible number of beings, compassionate love,
miraculous powers, perfect knowledge, having the very best, mastery over all qualities,
having vanquished the evil of death, insubstantiality and being the protector of the
worlds-they are permanent:
There is permanence since the causes are endless and sentieni beings inexhaustible din
number}. They have compassionate love, miraculous power, knowledge and utter
bliss). They are masters of all] qualities. The demon of death has been vanquished.
Being not of the essence of the compounded it is the ſtruel protector of all worldly
beings).
The manifestations do not
cease because Buddha
has infinite causes to
benefit beings, and there
are endless beings to
benefit
Why do these manifestations not discontinue? Why are they permanent? Because
Buddha has endless causes to benefit sentient beings. There are endless sentient
beings, and Buddha has to benefit all of them. He has the compassion to benefit
sentient beings as long as samsara exists. And he has the miracle power to
remain until samsara ceases to exist.
Buddha will not give up
samsara, primarily
because he has realised
samsara and nirvana are
equal. Also because he
has the bliss of samadhi,
and he is unstained by
samsaric faults
There are three reasons why the Buddha will not give up samsara. First and most
important, he has realised that samsara and nirvana are equal, so there is
nothing to abandon and nothing to adopt. That's the main one. Also, while he
manifests in samsara, he always has the bliss of samadhi, and samsaric faults will
not stain him. This will be explained, as usual. This is something so good about
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
172



the Uttaratantra. It's explained again and again, even within the root text. Now
he explains in more detail why the rupakaya is inexhaustible or permanent.
༡30
ལུས་དང་སྲོག་དང་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྣམས།
བཏང་ནས་དམ་ཆོས་འཛིན་ཕྱིར་དང་། །
སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན་ལ་ཕན་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
དང་པོར་དམ་བཅས་མཐར་ཕྱིན་ཕྱིར། །
Because, having devoted their bodies, lives and resources, they uphold the true
Dharma, because of completely fulfilling their initial promises to benefit beings.
Having offered bodies, lives and goods they (purely uphold the sacred Dharma. in
order to benefit all sentient beings they fulfil their vow as initially taken.
231
སངས་
ངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད་ནི་གཙང་བ་དང་། །
དག་པའི་ཐུགས་རྗེ་རབ་འཇུག་ཕྱིར། །
རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་རྐང་པ་སྟོན་པར་ནི། །
དེ་ཡི་གནས་ར་སྤྲོད་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
Because the stainless and pure compassion of the Buddhas permeates all beings,
because they manifest, through the bases of miraculous powers, by which they display
abiding,
Buddhahood supremely expresses itself as compassion both cleansed and purified.
Appearing on the feet of miraculous powers they can act forever by means of these.
232
མཁྱེན་པས་འཁོར་དང་མྱ་ངན་འདས། །
གཉིས་སུ་འཛིན་ལས་གྲོལ་བའི་ཕྱིར། །
རྟག་ཏུ་བསམ་ཡས་ཏིང་འཛིན་གྱི། །
བདེ་བ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་ལྡན་ཕྱིར། །
Because, having perfect knowledge, they are freed from believing in a samsara-nirvana
duality, because they have very best of bliss of constant and unimaginable samadhis.
By knowledge they are freed from the belief fixed on the duality of samsara and nirvana.
They always possess the best possible bliss of samadhi, beyond ideation and end).
No compounded
phenomena are
permanent, but the
Buddha's qualities are not
compounded phenomena
When we talk about 'permanent', you should know that it is just language that we
have to use. You all know that in Buddhism there is not a single compounded
phenomenon that is permanent. And that works well here, because none of the
Buddha's qualities are compounded phenomena, especially according to the
Shentongpas. But there's a difficulty here, because we have to talk about his
activity, how he benefits sentient beings. And when you think of the Buddha's
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
173



On the rupakaya level,
where we talk of Buddha
benefiting sentient beings
we use the word
'permanent' to mean
*continuous'
activities, you will wonder how can Buddha be permanent, because his activity
has to benefit sentient beings, and benefit' means there must be a beginning,
end and middle, otherwise it's not a benefit. So here, when we talk about
'permanent, especially on the rupakaya level, we're talking more in terms of it
being continuous, and that's why we use the word 'permanent. It's a continuous
phenomenon, like a permanent residence.
The Buddhas remain in
samsara in order to
benefit sentient beings
The rupakaya is continuously permanent, because it has all the causes and
reasons to exist in order to benefit sentient beings. For instance, when the
Buddhas were Bodhisattvas for three countless eons they sacrificed their bodies,
lives and wealth for a single word of Dharma. And there's a pu
ose to Buddhas
remaining in samsara, because they have to benefit the endless sentient beings.
And right at the beginning when they took the Bodhisattva vow, they vowed to
liberate all sentient beings, and that vow is to be fulfilled.
There are three reasons
why Buddha will continue
to benefit sentient beings
in samsara:
And because the Buddha has eliminated defilements and cognitive obscurations,
Buddha's compassion is unobstructed. Even though he might wish to liberate alt
sentient beings, one might wonder if he will have enough time to accomplish
this. But he has miraculous powers that allow him to remain forever if he wishes.
There are three reasons why the Buddha will not give up benefiting sentient
beings in samsara.
1) He sees no difference
between samsara and
nirvana, so there is no
giving up samsara
1) If he thought that samsara and nirvana were different, there might be good
reasons for him to give up, but that is not the case. He doesn't see any
difference between samsara and nirvana. Neither has any essence, so there is
no such thing as giving up samsara.
2) The downfalls of
samsara do not bother
him as he always dwells in
the bliss of samadhi
2) If the downfall of samsara bothered him or interfered with him, there might
be a possibility that he could give up samsara. But samsaric suffering never
bothers him, as he is always dwelling in the bliss of samadhi.
3) Samsaric defilements
cannot stain him, as he is
like a lotus
3) (The first two lines of stanza 233). If samsaric defilements could stain him, it
might also be possible he could give up samsara. But that is also not the
case, because he is like a lotus. While the lotus is born in the mud, the mud
does not stain it.
233
འཇིག་རྟེན་ན་ནི་སྤྱོད་པ་ན། །
འཇིག་རྟེན་ཆོས་ཀྱིས་གོས་མེད་ཕྱིར། !
འཆི་མེད་ཞི་བའི་གནས་ཐོབ་ལ། །
འཆི་བདུད་རྒྱུ་བ་མེད་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
Because even though they act in the world, by worldly qualities they are unblemished,
because, being immortal and having attained the state of peace, there is no opportunity
for the evil of death.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
174



While acting in the world (for other's good they are unsullied by all worldly
phenomena. Free from dying, it is the attainment of peace. In this sphere the demon of
death cannot roan.
234
1
1
འདུས་མ་བྱས་པའི་རང་བཞིན་གྱི།
ཐུབ་པ་གདོད་ནས་རབ་ཞིའི་ཕྱིར།
རྟོག་པ་སྐྱབས་མེད་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ནི། !
སྐྱབས་ལ་སོགས་པར་འཐད་ཕྱིར་རོ།
Because the victors, whose nature is uncreated, have been forever perfectly at peace
and because they are most suited as refuge and so forth for those without a source of
refuge.
The state of the Muni being of uncreated nature has been fully pacified since
beginningless time. For all those who are bereit of permanent shelter it provides the
most delightful refuge and so on.
Dharmakaya is
permanent, because the
demon of death cannot
enter the dharmakaya. In
the Vajrayana, we refer to
Guru Rinpoche as the
skull garland lotus born
deathless' one
Now we are talking about the cause for dharmakaya being permanent, in the last
two lines of stanza 233 and stanza 234. Dharmakaya is free from death, because
the demon or mara of death cannot enter or steal within the dharmakaya. These
things are exposed more in the Vajrayana, in a more raw fashion so to speak.
For instance, we refer to Guru Rinpoche as 'skull garland lotus-born deathless'
(Chimey Pema Tötreng) or 'boundless life' (Tsepamey). Again, all these things are
here partly because we like our god, our Buddha, to have extraordinary qualities.
We like them to have certain faults, but we don't want them to have certain faults
that we have, particularly death. Death is considered a big fault, a big mistake,
and if the saviour, the object of refuge also has that fault, then you could almost
say what's the point? So immortality is therefore appreciated and sought after.
The real demon of death
is dualism, which is
completely absent from
the dharmakaya, so the
dharmakaya is always
peaceful
Within the dharmakaya, the demon of death has no place to roam around,
because the real demon of death is dualism, things like right and left, beauty and
ugliness, samsara and nirvana. When you are closer to the right, then it's the
death of the left. When you're closer to beauty, it's the death of the ugliness.
And all of that is gone during the state of the dharmakaya. Not only gone, but
gone beyond. It's like the sky without any clouds. This is why dharmakaya is
always peaceful. Right from the beginning, there is no birth and no death, as
there is no cause or condition that interferes with dharmakaya. This is why the
dharmakaya, actually all the three kayas, is the only unfailing object of refuge.
This is why the three
kayas are the only
unfailing object of refuge
If our object of refuge is
even a little bit ordinary,
then it is no longer an
unfailing object of refuge
As we said earlier, we all like our object of refuge to be extraordinary, but if he
becomes too special then we don't like it. So he has to have a little bit of the
ordinary about him, some ordinary-ness. But as long as he has a little bit of
ordinary-ness then he might fail you, as there's always a loophole. For example,
let's say that he can fly, he can swim, and he can remember the past lifetimes of
himself and others and predict the future for thousands or millions of lifetimes.
Let's say that he has all the Buddha qualities, but let's also say his favourite food
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment 175



is pizza, which is your favourite food so you want him to have the same favourite
as you. Now he might not fail you for 100 years, and give you whatever you
need. But then one day you come to a place where there's no oven, no cheese,
no flour and all of this, and then he's no longer an object of refuge!
Buddha has no dualism or
preferences, so he cannot
be bribed or manipulated
Buddha is the unfailing object of refuge because he has no favouritism or
dualism. He cannot get upset, and he cannot be bribed. There's nothing he
prefers, so you cannot bribe or manipulate him.
235
དང་པོ་ཡི་ནི་རྒྱུ་བདུན་གྱིས། །
གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ཡི་རྟག་ཉིད་དེ།
ཕྱི་མ་གསུམ་གྱིས་སྟོན་པ་ནི། །
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ཡི་རྟག་པ་ཉིད། །
The first seven reasons demonstrate the form kayas' permanence and the last three
demonstrate the dharmakaya's permanence.
The first seven reasons clarify the permanence of the form kayas, while the latter three
illustrate why the dharmakaya lasts forever.
There are ten reasons why
Buddha is permanent.
The first seven refer to
the rupakayas, and the
last three to dharmakaya
In conclusion, we have talked about ten reasons. The first seven are the reasons
why the rupakayas are permanent, and the last three are the reasons why
dharmakaya is permanent. We've been talking about it being inconceivable and
unthinkable. And that's what we're now going to explain, again with lots of
summary, detail and all that.
236
ངག་ཡུལ་མིན་ཕྱིར་དོནདམ་གྱིས་བསྡུས་ཕྱིར། །
རྟོགས་གནས་མིན་ཕྱིར་དཔེ་ལས་འདས་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
བླ་ན་མེད་ཕྱིར་སྲིད་ཞིས་མ་བསྡུས་ཕྱིར། །
རྒྱལ་ཡུལ་འཕགས་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ། །
Since it is ineffable, consists of the ultimately true, is not the object of intellectual
investigation, is beyond example, is peerless and comprised of neither conditioned
existence nor "peace", it is the domain of the Buddhas, inconceivable for even the
deeply-realized.
it is not an object of speech and is embraced by the absolute. It is not a field for
ideation and is beyond any example, unexcelled and not embraced by existence and
peace. Even the noble cannot conceive the sphere of the Victor
The three kayas are
inconceivable and beyond
expression, conception,
analysis or example.
The three kayas are inconceivable. Even the sublime beings that dwell on the
tenth bhumi cannot conceive or comprehend this, let alone ordinary beings. It
cannot be expressed, because it is absolute truth, the absolute absolute, the final
absolute. No conceptual analysis can enter it. You cannot analyse it with
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
176



The three kayas are
neither samsara nor
nirvana
ordinary mind. There is no example. It is the most supreme. And the three
kayas are neither samsara nor nirvana. These reasons are explained in more
detail.
237
བསམ་མེད་བརྗོད་དུ་མེད་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། །
བརྗོད་མེད་དོན་དམ་ཡིན་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
དོན་དམ་བརྟག་བྱ་མིན་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། །
བརྟག་མིན་རྗེས་དཔག་བྱ་མིན་ཕྱིར། 1
inconceivable because it is ineffable, ineffable because it is the ultimately true,
ultimately true because it cannot be investigated intellectually, intellectually
uninvestigable because it cannot be deduced,
It is inconceivable since it cannot be verbally expressed. It is inexpressible since it
consists of the absolute (truth. It is absolute since it cannot be intellectually
scrutinized. It is inscrutable since it cannot be inferentially deduced.
238
དཔག་མིན་བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
བླ་ན་མེད་པ་མ་བསྡུ་
པ་བསྡུས་ཕྱིར། །
མ་བསྡུས་གནས་པ་མེད་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། །
ཡོན་ཏན་སྐྱོན་རྟོག་མེད ཕྱིར་རོ། །
Non-deducible since it is peerless, peerless because it is uncomprised, uncomprised
because it does not abide since qualities and faults are not conceptualized.
It is not deducible since it is peerless, the highest of all. It is the highest of all since it is
not comprised by anything. It is uncomprised since it does not dwell on any extremel.
This is because there is no dualistic idea of quality and fault.
Why the three kayas are
inconceivable and beyond
expression, conception,
analysis or example
The three kayas cannot be perceived even by the tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas,
because they cannot be expressed by speech. All speech, words, and language
are relative, so language, words, and speech are all dependent. Anything that
depends on something else can be manipulated and so it is fickle. Therefore the
absolute truth cannot be expressed. It is absolute truth because it is beyond
conceptions. When you conceptualise, you always have a reference such as an
example, which means you can only use inferential logic. No absolute truth can
be analysed and we can never find an example because there is nothing that is
equal to the three kayas, so it is peerless. Anything that has a peer is within
samsara and nirvana, but this is beyond samsara and nirvana, so there is no peer
or equal. And the three kayas are neither samsara nor nirvana, because from the
point of view of the three kayas, samsara is never understood as a fault, and
nirvana is never looked up to as some kind of blessing.
From the perspective of
the three kayas, samsara
is never seen as a fault
nor nirvana as a blessing
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
177



239
རྒྱུ་ལྔ་དག་གིས་ལྕབའི་ཕྱིར། །
ཆོས་སྐུ་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་པ་སྟེ། །
དྲུག་པས་དེ་ཡི་དངོས་མིན་ཕྱིར། །
གཟུགས་སྐུ་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་པའོ། །
For five reasons is the dharmakaya inconceivable, being by them extremely subtle, and
by the sixth are the form kayas inconceivable, since they are non-substantial.
For the first five reasons the dharmakaya is subtle and thus beyond the reach of
thought for the sixth the form kayas are inconceivable. [They show appearancel but
are not something that fulfils the function of this.
There are six reasons the
Buddha is inconceivable.
The first five refer to the
dharmakaya, the sixth to
the rupakayas
There are six reasons. The first five are to establish that dharmakaya is
inconceivable, and the sixth reason is to establish that the rupakayas are
unthinkable, because even though they appear to have birth and death, they are
not stained by that kind of fault.
240
བླ་མེད་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེ་སོགས་ཡོན་ཏན་གྱིས། །
ཡོན་ཏན་ཕ་རོལ་བྱོན་པའི་རྒྱལ་བ་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ། །
དེས་ན་རང་བྱུང་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཐ་མའི་ཚུལ་འདི་ནི། །
དྲང་སྲོང་ཆེན་པོ་དབང་ཐོབ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་རིག་མིན། །
Through their attributes of jñana unsurpassable, great compassion and others like these,
the victors have perfected every quality and are inconceivable. Therefore is this final
point, the spontaneously-present, not even understood by great sages who have
received empowerment.
Since through peerless primordial wisdom, great compassion and further attributes all
qualities are finally perfected, the Victor is inconceivable. Thus the last mode of the
Self-Sprung Ones is not even seen by those Great Sages who have received "the
Empowerment of Splendorous Light Rays)".
The Buddha's qualities of
wisdom and compassion
are beyond samsara and
nirvana, and cannot even
be expressed by the tenth
bhumi Bodhisattvas
This is the conclusion of the chapter. These great, peerless qualities such as
wisdom and compassion do not dwell within the extremes of samsara or nirvana.
Such qualities cannot be expressed even by the great sages, referring to the
tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas, or even by those who have received the abhisheka of
the great luminosity. The tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas are not ordinary, you know!
As explained in the Madhyamakavatara, if they wish to, they can instantly see
hundreds of millions of Buddhas or manifest themselves into hundreds of
millions of forms. Forget about us, but even the Bodhisattvas on the paths of
accumulation and application cannot distinguish the tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas
from the real Buddha. And yet it's said that the tenth bhumi Bodhisattva's
wisdom is like the water collected within the footprint of a cow, whereas the
Buddha's wisdom like the ocean. That's the end of the second chapter.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
178



ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་རིགས་རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་བ་ལས། བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་
སྐབས་ཏེ་གཉིས་པའོ།། །།
This was the second chapter, on enlightenment, from the Analysis of the Potential for
the Rare and Supreme in this "Ultimate Mahayana Treatise on the Changeless
Continuity of the True Nature".
This was the section "Enlightenment", the second chapter of The Commentary on the
Highest Continuity of the Mahayana Dharma that Analyzes the Disposition of the Rare
and the Sublime Ones.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
179



Chapter Three
The Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
241
རང་དོན་གཞན་དོན་དོན་དམ་སྐུ་དང་ནི། །
དེ་ལ་བརྟེན་པ་ཀུན་རྫོབ་སྐུ་ཉིད་དེ། །
བྲལ་དང་རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའི་འབྲས་བུ་ནི།
ཡོན་ཏན་དབྱེ་བ་དྲུག་ཅུ་བཞི་འདི་དག །
Fulfilment for oneself and benefit for the others are the ultimate-true kaya and its
dependent relative-true kayas. The fruits of freedom and perfect maturity are their sixty-
four qualities.
Benefit for oneseli and benefit for others are equivalent to the ultimate kaya and the
relative kayas based upon it. Being the fruits of freedom and complete maturation these
are lendowed with sixty-four types of qualities.
The dharmakaya contains
the rupakaya, and these
two contain all Buddha
qualities
There are 64 Buddha
qualities. 32 are draldrey,
the result of elimination,
and the other 32 are the
effect of maturation
We are now talking about the qualities of enlightenment (changchub), the
qualities of the Buddha. The containers of these qualities are the rupakaya and
dharmakaya, but there is only one real container - the dharmakaya. The
dharmakaya is the real container that contains the rupakaya, and these two kayas
then act as container for all the Buddha qualities. There are 64 Buddha qualities.
32 qualities are the result of elimination (dralwey dreybu), and the other 32
qualities are the effect of maturation. There's a debate here, but in brief I think
many of the Rangtongpas might not say this effect of maturation is actually a
direct effect of the result of elimination, so in other words, they would say that
these qualities need to be cultivated. These 64 qualities are what we are going to
explain. Now there is another brief summary.
The Rangtongpas might
say the second set of 32
needs to be cultivated
242
བདག་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ནི་འབྱོར་པའི་གནས། 1
དམ་པའི་དོན་གྱི་སྐུ་ཡིན་ཏེ། །
དྲང་སྲོང་རྣམས་ཀྱི་བརྡ་ཡི་སྐུ། །
ཕ་རོལ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པའི་གནས། །
The ground for acquiring fulfilment for oneself is the embodiment of the ultimate truth.
The symbolic embodiments of the great sages are the ground for the greatest possible
altruism.
The abode adhering to benefit for oneself is the kaya being (wisdom's] sacred object.
The symbolic kaya of sages is the ground of best possible benefit for other beings.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
180



243
དང་པོའི་སྐུ་ནི་སྟོབས་ལ་སོགས། །
བྲལ་བའི་ཡོན་ཏན་རྣམས་དང་ལྡན། །
གཉིས་པ་སྐྱེས་བུ་ཆེན་པོའི་མཚན།
རྣམ་སྨིན་ཡོན་ཏན་དག་དང་ལྡན། 1
The first kaya is endowed with freedom's qualities - powers and so on. The second
with maturity's qualities - the marks of a perfect being.
The first kaya has the qualities of freedom, which are the qualities of power and so on.
The second has those of full maturation, which are the marks of a great being.
The 32 qualities of the
dharmakaya are the
Buddha's own wealth, and
the 32 qualities of the
rupakaya are the wealth
for others. In reality, they
are all one
The 64 qualities are divided between the two kayas, the dharmakaya and the
rupakaya. The 32 qualities of the dharmakaya are what we call the wealth for the
Buddha himself, his own personal wealth that benefits himself so to speak. And
the other 32 qualities, those of the rupakaya, are to be enjoyed by others. This is
where all the activity of benefiting sentient beings comes from. But all these are
only distinguished for the sake of explanation. We have to talk as if there are
two kayas and 64 qualities and all that, but in reality they are all one. The 32
qualities of the dharmakaya, which are the result of elimination, are:
The 32 qualities of the
dharmakaya are:
- The ten powers
- The four fearlessnesses
- The eighteen
uncommon qualities
- The ten powers (tobchu)
- The four fearlessnesses (mi jigpa zhi)
- The eighteen uncommon (or distinctive) qualities
The 32 qualities of the
rupakaya are the 32 major
marks
The 32 qualities of the
dharmakaya cannot be
appreciated by other
beings, so we refer to
them as his own wealth
The qualities of the rupakaya are the 32 major marks, which we will explain
tomorrow. The reason why we have to distinguish between his own wealth and
the wealth that can benefit others is that his own wealth cannot be appreciated
by other beings. For example, he has the quality wangpo Khyenpa, which allows
him to see every single sentient being's sense elements, constituents and so on,
but ordinary people cannot really relate to this kind of quality, so it is more like
his own wealth,
The 32 qualities of the
rupakaya can be
appreciated by disciples.
Shentongpas say these
qualities have always
been present, but
Rangtongpas say they
need to be cultivated
By contrast, qualities such as the ushnisha at the top of his head or his lips that
are like the bimpa fruit are things that others such as the audience, his
disciplines, can appreciate. Shentongpa masters would say that the effects of
maturation, like the 32 major marks, are there right from the beginning. They
say that not even a single lock of hair can be produced. But the Rangtongpa
masters would say those things need to be cultivated, and the way they are
cultivated is through two aspirations. For example, when the Buddha was a
Bodhisattva, he engaged in prayers. And when disciples like us generate our
devotion and our pure vision (dak nang), then we begin to see these qualities.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
181



244
སྟོབས་ཉིད་མ་རིག སྒྲིབ་ལ་རྡོ་རྗེ་བཞིན། །
མི་འཇིགས་ཉིད་ནི་འཁོར་དུ་སེང་གི་བཞིན། །
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་མ་འདྲེས་མཁའ་བཞིན་ཏེ། །
རྔུབ་པའི་བསྟན་པ་རྣམ་གཉིས་ཆུ་ཟླ་བཞིན། །
Against ignorance's veils, the powers are like a vajra and the fearlessnesses in any
situation like a lion. Like space are the tathagatas' distinctive qualities and like the
moon in water the two aspects victors manifest.
Power is like a vajra against the veil of unknowing. Fearlessness acts like a lion amidst
fanyl assembly. Like space are the unmixed features of the Tathagata, like a water
moon the two facets of the Muni's teaching.
The powers are like a
vajra, the fearlessnesses
are like a lion, and the
uncommon qualities are
like space
Power (as in the ten powers) is like a vajra. It has the power to dispel ignorance,
and it does not get dispelled in return. That's the vajra. It has the power to
dispel something else, but nothing can dispel it. When HH Dudjom Rinpoche
praised the compassion of the Buddha, he said, "he knows how to grasp with
compassion, but he doesn't know how to give it up". Fearlessness (as in the four
fearlessnesses) is like a lion. When Buddha is surrounded by a mass of people,
he has no nervousness. And the eighteen uncommon qualities are like the sky,
because no other phenomena resemble them. This is again explained
thoroughly. First we will talk about the 32 qualities that are the result of
elimination: the ten powers, four fearlessnesses and eighteen uncommon
qualities.
The Ten Powers
245
གནས་དང་གནས་མིན་ལས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་
རྣམ་སྨིན་དང་ནི་དབང་པོ་དང་། །
ཁམས་རྣམས་དང་ནི་མོས་པ་དང་། །
ཀུན་འགྲོའི་ལམ་དང་བསམ་གཏན་སོགས། །
To know the appropriate and the inappropriate, the full maturation of actions, faculties,
temperaments, wishes, the paths that lead everywhere,
Knowing what is worthwhile and worthless, knowing the ripening product of all action,
knowing taculties, temperaments and wishes, knowing the path reaching the entire
range,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
182



246
ཉོན་མོངས་དྲི་མ་མེད་པ་དང་། །
གནས་ནི་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ་དང་། །
ལྷ་ཡི་མིག་དང་ཞི་བ་དག
མཁྱེན་པའི་སྟོབས་ནི་རྣམ་པ་བཅུ། །
Meditative stability and so on-that unblemished by defilement, remembrance of former
states, divine vision and peace the ten powers of perfect knowledge are these.
Knowing meditative stability and so on - when it is afflicted or without pollution --
memory of past states, divine sight and peace are the ten aspects of the power of
knowledge
The Buddha's ten powers
are his knowledge of:
First he will just present the names of the ten powers, then he will explain them
in detail. Maitreya is so kind, really kind. Now you are really beginning to learn
about the omniscience of the Buddha in more detail. The ten powers are:
1) What is fitting
2) Karma
3) Faculties
4) Elements/disposition
5) Aspiration
6) Vehicles
7) Defilements/stainless
8) Remembering the past
9) Birth and death
10) What will exhaust
each defilement
1) His wisdom knows what is fitting or unfitting.
2) He knows karma, the result or maturity of a particular karma. This is a really
important power, as many people think karma is easy to learn, as usually
when we talk about karma, we talk about cause, condition and effect. But
only the Buddha knows the real detail of karma and its effect.
3) Only his wisdom knows who has what kind of faculties.
4) Only he knows who has what kind of element or disposition (kham).
5) Only he knows who has what kind of aspiration (möpa).
6) Only he knows the different vehicles of the path, and who needs what kind of
vehicle.
7) Only he knows the difference between what is defilement and what is
stainless.
8) Only he can recall or remember (though 'remember is not really the right
word) absolutely all past events, places, times and so on.
9) Only he with his divine eye can see death, transformation and birth in
absolute detail.
10) And only he can tell what will exhaust each distinct defilement (sakpa).
These are the ten powers, and now these will be explained again.
247
གནས་དང་གནས་མིན་རྣམ་སྨིན་ཁམས་དང་འགྲོ་བའི་མོས་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་དང་། །
ཉོན་མོངས་རྣམ་བྱང་དབང་པོའི་ཚོགས་དང་སྔོན་གནས་རྗེས་སུ་དྲན་པ་དང་། །
ལྷ་ཡི་མིག་དང་ཟག་པ་ཟད་ཚུལ་མི་ཤེས་གོ་ཆ་རྩིག་བརྟན་དང་། །
ཤིང་རྣམས་འབིགས་དང་འཇིག་དང་གཅོད་ཕྱིར་སྟོབས་གང་ཡིན་པ་རྡོ་རྗེ་བཞིན། }
Such powers - the appropriate and inappropriate, full maturations, temperaments,
beings' wishes, the various paths, the defiled and perfectly pure, the groupings of
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point Qualities
183



faculties, remembrance of former states, divine vision and the way to exhaust impurity -
are like a vajra because they penetrate ignorance's ammour, shatter its walls and hew
down its tree.
Knowing the worthwhile and worthless, complete ripening, the various temperaments,
paths and aspirations of beings, their manifold faculties, the defiled and the utterly pure,
remembrance of previous states for existence), divine sight and knowing the way in
which (all) pollution is exhausted piercingly destroys the armour of ignorance, fells its
trees and smashes its unshakable walls, laying them in utter ruin. Such power therefore
resembles an findestructible) vajra.
Virtuous thoughts or
actions give a favourable
or attractive result
The powers are explained with an example. Virtuous thoughts or actions give a
result that is attractive or favourable. They will not result in unfavourable or
unattractive experiences. This is a very general explanation, because we can only
generalise.
Everything that we talk
about is generalisation
and guesswork, but it is
good generalisation
All the things that we talk about are generalisations, like five aggregates, five
Buddha families, five emotions, and five paths. Why? Because we don't have
these ten powers. From now until the last stage of the tenth bhumi Bodhisattva,
everything that we do is guesswork. Until you have these ten powers, everything
that you do is guesswork. But they are good generalisations. And your guesses
will become better and better. Generalisations are all that we can rely on. It's
like if you have some French guests coming for dinner, as long as there is a
bottle of red wine, you are safe. If some Indians come, you are safe with some
masalas.
When we talk about good
and bad karma, we
generalise based on
ethics, morality, and our
innate sense of justice
When we talk about karma, we say don't kill, don't lie, and don't cheat because
you will have bad consequences. We don't only talk about this in Buddhism, but
also in the mundane world - ethics, morality, all this. It comes from all kinds of
things - culture, traditions, teachings, books and so on. And there is a good
cause of all this morality and ethics, which is something a bit like empathy. Like
let's say you have never had any kinds of religious influence for seven
generations. No one told you that you shouldn't steal or cheat and all that.
Maybe you see somebody's handbag wide open and you could steal a couple of
Euros and maybe that will buy you a good lunch. But you do not do it because
you feel uncomfortable. There are no rules. There's no religion and no police to
catch you, but you feel uncomfortable. Or let's say you are such a bad person
that you don't feel bad about stealing, but nevertheless if somebody steals from
you, you don't like it.
So although the general
rule is that if you do
something bad you will
not have good outcomes
such as success and long
life, this doesn't always
seem to work. Only the
Buddha knows what is
'fitting' and 'unfitting'
These things have resulted in some kind of ethic. One should not tell lies,
because there are bad consequences. And in religions, we go even further. They
say that if you tell a lie now, then in your next life you will go through various
consequences. But then we see there are many contradictory phenomena in this
world, certain people who do many bad things and yet are successful and live
long. So although the general rule might be that if you do something bad, you
will not be successful or live long, it doesn't always work! For some people the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point Qualities
184



opposite appears to be true. So, what's happening? Is the law of karma also
biased? These are the kinds of things we call 'fitting' and 'unfitting'.
Although karma is very
scientific in terms of
cause, condition and
effect, we always
generalise when we
describe which causes
lead to which results.
Only the Buddha doesn't
generalise about karma
We can only generalise when we talk about someone like George Bush. We might
say that he is American, and that it's generally the whole world's bad karma to
have him there. Or maybe we could say it's our good karma, and having him
there will exhaust all of our bad karma within these four years. We might say it's
Donald Rumsfeld's great karma to have a great leader like him to work for. You
understand. It's things like that. It's very difficult to generalise, and only the
Buddha knows what's really happening in the karmic system. Karma is very
scientific in terms of cause, condition and effect. But usually we generalise and
only include certain causes when we say, 'these causes and conditions gives us
this kind of result'. It's even like that in the scientific world. Ten years ago, they
might have talked about how a certain medicine would bring various benefits,
and today they might say that this same medicine has caused various diseases.
This is fitting and unfitting. We don't have the knowledge. And it's also why
there will never be an absolutely correct diet book. Maybe in ten years someone
will find all the diseases that have been caused because of Dr. Atkins' diet. Only
the Buddha can write the absolutely right diet book!
Likewise, only the Buddha
knows the dispositions of
beings. The rest of us
always generalise, for
example in relationships
Another very important power is his ability to understand people's disposition
(kham). Vajrayana people talk about this a lot. For example, you know how we
like to date people. We want to talk to them, be with them, and more - with or
without a cheese grater! We like to build relationships. But it doesn't work,
because beings' dispositions are different. We can only generalise, of course.
The first day you meet someone, you're already generalising. If you're a man,
instead of looking at her eyes, you're looking at something else. But it all works,
to a certain extent. It lasts for about 90 or 100 years, and we call it 'success'.
Although I think on average nowadays, it lasts only two years.
The difficulty is that our
dispositions change all
the time
The difficulty is that the other person's disposition is changing all the time. It
could be for a simple reason, like a bee that has recently been flying to a flower,
and the bee is flying back and is carrying some pollen, and one drop of the
pollen gets into your partner's nose, and that can cause the whole upset of their
disposition. You understand? And normally you talk a certain way to your
partner, but now that doesn't work, and it's all because of this pollen, just one
drop, which was innocently dropped by this bee! So whatever you say at that
time, honey, sugar, salt, butter, whatever you say, whatever gift you give, it won't
work! This is particularly important when it comes to teaching, because a
teaching has to take account of a person's emotions, defilements, obscurations,
five aggregates and so on. They are all related. And because a person's
disposition changes every single moment, only the Buddha can apply the right
medicine for their particular disposition at a given moment.
Only the Buddha can
apply the right medicine
for a particular
disposition at a particular
moment
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
185



Likewise, only the Buddha
knows our aspirations at
any given moment
Only the Buddha knows
which vehicles or paths
are necessary to benefit
different people
And then there is aspiration. Different sentient beings have different aspirations.
And even if, for example, I aspire to become enlightened, that doesn't mean
anything! It's just a big generalisation. Each moment we have a slightly different
aspiration, and only the Buddha knows each of these aspirations, which is why
only he can give absolutely the right dosage of the right medicine at the right
time. We also generalise about vehicles. Now we talk about the Shravakayana,
Mahayana and Vajrayana and that's about it, as that's all we can imagine. Only
Buddha has the capacity to understand vehicles. It could be that those who were
born in the desert have the disposition and aspiration to cover their faces, and
for them, he may have taught that you have to pray to the almighty five times a
day, things like that. This is a big compliment, coming from me! And for others
who have a certain disposition, perhaps he taught that it's necessary to have a
concept such as 'saviour', and all of that. We don't know! Only he knows these
things.
How the ten powers are
like a vajra
Anyway, if we compare these ten powers to the example of a vajra:
The first six are like a vajra that pierces and destroys the armour of
ignorance.
And the next three are like a vajra that destroys the wall of ignorance
The last one is like a vajra that cuts ignorance
The Four Fearlessnesses
248
ཆོས་ཀུན་རྫོགས་
གས་པར་བྱང་ཆུབ་དང་། །
གེགས་ནི་འགོག་པར་བྱེད་པ་དང་།
ལམ་སྟོན་པ་དང་འགོག་སྟོན་ལ། །
མི་འཇིགས་པ་ནི་རྣམ་པ་བཞི། །
In everything perfectly enlightened, in bringing cease to hindrances, in teaching the
path and stating cessation, they have four kinds of fearlessness.
Perfectly enlightened find all phenomena, setting an end to lail] hindrances, teaching the
path and showing cessation are the four aspects of fearlessness.
The four fearlessnesses.
Buddha has no fear in
saying:
Now the four fearlessnesses:
1) All phenomena have
always been enlightened
1) He has no fear in saying that all phenomena have always been enlightened,
because there is no opponent who can contradict him.
2) He has no fear in saying that defilements are obstacles to enlightenment, and
therefore they need to be destroyed, because no one can contradict him.
2) Defilements obstruct
enlightenment and need
to be destroyed
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
186



3) The 37-fold
Bodhisattva path will take
you to enlightenment
3) He has no fear in saying that the 37-fold Bodhisattva path is the path that will
take you to enlightenment, because again no one can contradict or defeat
him.
4) And then he has no fear to claim that he has attained nirodha, the cessation
of suffering.
4) He has attained the
cessation of suffering
249
བདག་གཞན་ཤེས་བྱའི་དངོས་པོ་རྣམ་ཀུན་ཤེས་དང་ཤེས་མཛད་ཕྱིར།
སྤང་དངོས་སྤངས་དང་སྤྱོང་མཛད་ཕྱིར་དང་བརྟེན་བྱ་བསྟེན་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
ཐོབ་བྱ་བླ་མེད་ཤིན་ཏུ་དྲི་མེད་ཐོབ་དང་ཐོབ་མཛད་ཕྱིར། །
རང་གཞན་དོན་ལྡན་གསུང་ཕྱིར་དྲང་སྲོང་གང་དུའང་ཐོགས་པ་མེད། །
Because they then selves know and help others to know every aspect of the knowledge,
because they have relinquished and help others relinquish those things which must be
relinquished, because they teach and make taught and because they have attained and
help attain the utterly stainless highest attainment, they truthfully tell others their own
realization and in so doing are unhindered in any way.
Knowing and causing lothers) to know all the different aspects of things that are to be
known of oneself and others, having abandoned and causing abandonment of all things
that are to be abandoned, having relied on what is to be relied upon, having attained
and causing attainment of the Peerless and Stainless to be attained, they relate their own
truth to others. Thus the Great Sages are unhindered anywhere.
The four fearlessnesses
allow beings to follow the
Four Noble Truths
What do these four fearlessnesses do? First, Buddha has actualised the truth that
all phenomena are the truth of suffering, and he will guide all other beings to
actualise it. He has abandoned the cause of all suffering, and he will guide
others to do the same. He has practised the path to the cessation of suffering,
and he will guide others to do the same. He has obtained the cessation of
suffering, and he will guide others reach the same. And this is what the four
fearlessnesses do.
250
རི་དྭགས་དབང་པོ་ཇི་ལྟར་ནགས་མཐར་རྟག་འཇིག་མེད། །
རི་དྭགས་རྣམས་ལ་སྐྲག་པ་མེད་པར་རྒྱུ་བ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཚོགས་ནང་ཐུབ་པའི་དབང་པོ་སེང་གེ་ཡང་། །
ལེགས་གནས་ལྟོས་མེད་བརྟན་པའི་རྩལ་དང་ལྡན་པར་གནས། །
Just as in all parts of the jungle the king of wild animals is never fearful, moving
fearlessly amongst all other animals, so also does that lion, the king of victors, remain,
in any gathering, completely fearless, independent, stable and highly skilful.
The lord of animals is ever fearless to the far ends of the jungle, undaunted roaming
amongst the other animals. In any assembly the Lord of Munis is a lion as well,
remaining at ease, independent, stable and endowed with skill.
When lions are in the forest, they have no fear. They can relax and walk around,
Likewise, within the crowds, Buddha has no fear, because no one can contradict
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
187



Lions are fearless in the
forest, and similarly the
Buddha is fearless within
a crowd because he
cannot be contradicted
all that we have talked about. He does not have to rely on anyone, so he has no
fear. And because he has no ignorance, not a single drop of defilements, he's
not handicapped. And that's why he has complete power and skill. And if he
were here now, the heat of the tent would never bother him! OK, that's it for
today.
Day 4
Introduction
We are discussing the
qualities of the
dharmakaya, which are
the result of elimination,
like the example of
cleaning a window
At this point, we discussing the qualities of the Buddha and enlightenment.
And there are two groups of qualities - the qualities that are the result of
elimination, and the qualities that are the effect of maturation. Last year, we
were talking about the example of cleaning a window. The dirt on the surface of
the window is definitely temporary and removable. When you eliminate that dirt,
then the window, the glass, becomes clean. You can say that's a bit like the
result of elimination. Of course, in reality, whether there is dirt or not, the
inherent quality of the glass is clear. It's not stained. Whether the dirt has been
there for a long time or not, it will not make any difference. But during the path,
you can think in terms of cleaning the dirt, so we can also have the concept of
the gradual appearance of a clean window or glass, and we can say it is an effect
of maturation. We are still talking about the result of elimination. We have
already discussed the ten powers and four fearlessnesses, and today we will talk
about the eighteen uncommon characteristics of the Buddha. These things are
very difficult to discuss, because they are uncommon!
The Buddha's qualities are
inconceivable, but we can
at least listen to his
activity, such as the four
sounds
The effect of maturation is difficult to discuss. We will go through the list later,
but i'll give you one example of how the Buddha's qualities are so distinctive.
Yesterday we were talking about the qualities of nirmanakaya Buddha, and about
the show that started when Shakyamuni was in Tushita heaven and continued
until he passed into parinirvana. Then Maitreya talked about the activity of
Buddha, and the first thing he said was that Buddha made four sounds. Let's
forget about the ten strengths and all that for a moment and just examine those
four sounds. His activity arises from his qualities, so even though his qualities
are incredible and inconceivable, at least we can listen to this example of his
activity. And if you really contemplate them, these four sounds are amazing.
2500 years ago, Buddha
said all compounded
enomena are
impermanent
Some people say all
religions are the same,
but they are actually all
different
The first of these four sounds or four voices is that all compounded phenomena
are impermanent. Full stop. He had the complete confidence to say that. And
this was 2500 years ago! Nowadays people make very strange attempts to be
politically correct, trying to label it as openness and a compassionate mind,
saying that all religions have one goal, one essence, and one message, which
means that they're all the same. I completely disagree with that! No religion is
the same as another. They are all distinctive, and especially Buddhism. That
kind of dialogue only works in an inter-faith conference.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
188



In these degenerate
times, we have the habit
of looking for the faults in
greatness and the good in
a bad situation
In these degenerated times, we humans have a strange habit. Whenever we see a
really great being, our first motivation is trying to find a fault, and whenever we
have a terrible situation, the first thing we do is try to find some good in it so we
can talk about it! I sometimes wonder what kind of bad karma Hitler has
accumulated, because no one seems to try to find something good in him! He
must also have something good, and there are also good reasons to find that
out. If you really want to look for the good, better to do it equally.
The four seals do not
need to be adapted as
times change, and they
cannot be used as a
political tool
Many religions need to have some kind of progress, and they need to change as
time passes. But take these four voices, for example the first voice that all
compounded things are impermanent. Do we need to change that? No! Never in
ten thousand years will someone find that any compounded phenomenon has
suddenly become permanent. Never. These four voices define Buddhism. And
they don't talk about whether a woman should have four husbands or not, and
Buddha doesn't talk about how all Buddhists must try and make the whole world
Buddhist. Nor can any of them be used as a political tool. How can a leader say,
"you better behave, or all compounded things are impermanent"?
Nor is there a lot of room
for them to be
reinterpreted
And nowadays there's something else we see with religions. People often say
things like, "actually the original text is fine, but later disciples have interpreted
this". But there's not a lot of room to interpret the four sounds or voices:
All compounded phenomena are impermanent, period.
All kinds of thoughts or emotions that derive from clinging to self are pain.
Period. No room for interpretation.
All phenomena have no inherently or truly existing nature. Period. No
interpretation.
Nirvana is beyond extremes.
Maybe in the future, some long bearded fanatical Buddhist masters might try to
interpret them, but it's impossible. It just won't work! For example, when we
hear that all phenomena are emptiness, how are you going to use that as a
threat? It cannot be used as a threat. And when we hear that nirvana is beyond
extremes and beyond aspiration, that's the opposite of "if you do these things
and engage in this work, you are guaranteed to go to a certain place, to sit on a
lofty sofa" or things like that. There's none of that here!
Buddha didn't just say
these four things. He
gave us countless paths
to realise them, and to
attain liberation
Now consider that these things were taught 2500 years ago. This is the
Buddha's activity, and we are not even talking about his quality. We like to say
that a person has to be judged by their actions, so someone who taught
something like this has to be slightly different. And the great thing is, he didn't
just say these four things and write some books about it and then conclude his
work. He gave us countless paths to realise this, to liberate us. And his path and
his methods are interpretable, many of them. Because, he has to say different
things for different audiences, and he himself said it's fine to interpret, and that
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
189



We should not accept the
Buddha's path blindly.
We should burn it and
temper it like gold
we should interpret. He actually said we should not take his path blindly, but
that we should burn it and temper it like gold. He even gave us a way to judge
which paths should not be interpreted and which should be interpreted.
The Eighteen Distinctive Qualities
251
འཁྲུལ་དང་ཅ་ཅོ་མི་མངའ་སྟེ། །
སྟོན་ལ་དྲན་པ་ཉམས་མི་མངའ། །
མཉམ་པར་མ་བཞག་ཐུགས་མི་མངའ། །
འདུ་ཤེས་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཀྱང་མི་མངའ།
The Buddhas are unmistaken and do not noisily chatter, their mindfulness is
impeccable and their mind is never not resting in meditation. They do not harbour
ideas of various kinds.
There is no delusion and no idle talk. The l'eacher's mindfulness is unimpaired. Never
is his mind not resting evenly. There is no harbouring of various ideas.
3,2
མ་བརྟགས་བཏང་སྙོམས་མི་མངའ་སྟེ།
འདུན་དང་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་དྲན་པ་དང་
། །
ཤེས་རབ་རྣམ་གྲོལ་རྣམ་གྲོལ་གྱི། །
ཡེ་ཤེས་གཟིགས་པ་ཉམས་མི་མངའ། །
Never is their impartiality something undeliberate and their mighty aspiration is never
subject to degradation; nor is their diligence, their memory nor their prajña, nor their
perfect liberation and perception - the jñana of liberation.
There is no equanimity without analysis. His aspiration, diligence, mindfulness and
discriminative wisdom are unimpaired, as are total release and its eye of wisdom.
153
ལས་རྣམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྔོན་འགྲོ་དང་། །
དུས་ལ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྒྲིབ་པ་མེད། །
དེ་ལྟར་བཅོ་བརྒྱུད་འདི་དང་གཞན། །
སྟོན་པའི་མ་འདྲེས་ཡོན་ཏན་ཡིན། །
Their activities are preceded by jñana and that jñana to time's injuries is not prone.
These eighteen qualities and more are those teachers' attributes alone.
All action is preceded by primordial wisdom and this is unobscured with regard to time.
Thus these eighteen features and others are the unmixed qualities of the Teacher.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
190



The eighteen distinctive
qualities
(1) Six distinctive qualities
of the Buddha's action
None of the Buddha's
actions are deluded. All
are done to benefit beings
Now we come to the eighteen distinctive qualities. There's a good explanation in
the book “Treasury of precious qualities" by Jigme Lingpa (Yönten Dző). For those
who have some kind of aspiration to read that book, it's on page 299. Anyway,
Buddha's body has no delusion. All his acts, even opening or closing his eyes,
are done to benefit sentient beings. There's no deluded or wasted bodily or
physical activity that doesn't benefit sentient beings, such as yawning or
stretching. If it doesn't benefit, he doesn't engage in that kind of activity. And
his speech also has no delusion. It's not like Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas,
who have some faults in their body and their speech, for example sometimes
they laugh loud, like a horse neighing. But Buddhas don't do that, unless it's
benefiting beings.
The Buddha is never not
mindful. Unlike
Shravakas, he does not
have meditation and
post-meditation
And the Buddha's mind is never not mindful. For example, the Shravakas
sometimes have to focus for them to be mindful, but Buddha is never apart from
meditation. In other words, he does not have meditation and post-meditation
like others. For example, when Shravakas go for alms, then they are in post-
meditation rather than meditation. But whether Buddha is begging alms or
answering someone's question, he is always in the state of meditation. Buddhas
do not have discriminating perceptions, unlike for example Shravakas who
discriminate between samsara as bad and nirvana as good. Buddhas,
Bodhisattvas and even Shravakas may all treat students with equanimity or
impartiality. For example, they might decide not to teach them. But only the
Buddha does it with proper analysis, so to speak. These are six distinctive
qualities of the Buddha's actions.
(11) Six distinctive qualities
of the Buddha's speech
Next are the six distinctive qualities of Buddha's realisation. Buddha is
constantly joyful, with keenness and a wish to act for others, unlike others such
as the Shravakas. He also has distinctive mindfulness, diligence, wisdom, and
complete liberation of cognitive obscurations and defilements.
(iii) Three distinctive
activities
(iv) Three distinctive
wisdoms
And then there are three distinctive activities. All his activity of body, speech and
mind is always accompanied by wisdom. And the last three are his three
distinctive wisdoms. We have to say 'distinctive wisdom' because Shravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas also have wisdom. But only Buddha knows the essence of the
three times, therefore only Buddha knows the three times without fixation and
obstruction.
These are the general eighteen different distinctive qualities of the Buddha, and
there are also some others. For example when Buddha wears a robe, the robe
never touches his body. There's always a space about four fingers' width. Now
we'll have another repetition and a more detailed explanation.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point Qualities
191



2644
འཁྲུལ་དང་ཅ་ཅོ་བསྙེལ་དང་ཐུགས་གཡོ་ཐ་དད་ཀྱི་ནི་འདུ་ཤེས་དང་
། །
ངང་གི་བཏང་སྙོམས་དྲང་སྲོང་ལ་མེད་འདུན་པ་དང་ནི་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་དང་། །
དྲན་པ་རྣམ་དག་དྲི་མེད་ཤེས་རབ་རྟག་ཏུ་རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བ་དང་། །
ཤེས་བྱའི་དོན་ཀུན་གཟིགས་པ་གྲོལ་བའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལས་ནི་ཉམས་མི་མངའ། །
For great sages there are no mistakes, chatter, unmindfulness, mental agitation, various
forms of ideation or causal indifference. Aspiration, diligence, memory, perfectly pure
and immaculate prajña, constant, perfect liberation and the jñana of perfect liberation,
which sees all aspects of the knowable - these are theirs and these never suffer from
any deterioration.
Delusion, idle talk, forgetfulness, mental agitation, ideation of duality and indifferent
equanimity: the Sage does not have any of these. His aspiration, diligence and
mindfulness, his utterly pure and unstained discriminative wisdom, his constant total
release and his primordial wisdom of liberation seeing all fields of the knowable do not
suffer any impairment.
255
གང་གི་ལས་གསུམ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྔོན་འགྲོའི་རྗེས་སུ་འཇུག་པ་དང་
། །
དུས་གསུམ་རྟག་ཏུ་ཐོགས་པ་མེད་པ་མཁྱེན་པ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་འཇུག་པ་སྟེ། །
གང་རྟོགས་འགྲོ་བར་འཇིགས་མེད་དམ་ཆོས་འཁོར་ལོ་ཆེན་པོ་རབ་བསྐོར་བ། །
ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་དང་ལྡན་རྒྱལ་བ་ཉིད་དེ་སངས་རྒྱས་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་བརྙེས། ，
All three activities, whatever they may be are preceded and accompanied by jñana.
Their perfect knowledge constantly and extensively penetrates the three times without
hindrance. Such having been realized, the Buddhas, those victorious ones with
compassion's magnificence achieve a perfect and fearless turning of the great wheel of
the true Dharma for beings.
His three activities are preceded by primordial wisdom and display themselves in its
likeness. He manifests his vast definitive knowing, always unhindered in its vision of the
three times. By such insight he is fearless and supremely turns the Great Wheel of Pure
Dharma for beings. Endowment with great compassion and quintessence of victory are
what Buddhas will find.
This is basically a repetition of everything that was just said. The Buddha is free
from all faults of body, speech and mind. He is never in the state of not
meditating. He never distinguishes between samsara and nirvana. And he never
carelessly leaves beings because of his indifference. He is never apart from
motivation, diligence, mindfulness, stainless wisdom, and liberation. He's never
apart from these wisdoms. All his actions of body, speech and mind are always
preceded by wisdom. And he knows the nature of past, present and future.
These are the eighteen distinctive qualities of the Buddha.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
19



256
1
ས་སོགས་ལ་ཡོད་ཆོས་གང་ཡིན་པའི་ཆོས་ཉིད་དེ་ནི་ནམ་མཁའི་མིན།
ནམ་མཁའི་མཚན་ཉིད་སྒྲིབ་མེད་ལ་སོགས་མཚན་ཉིད་གང་དེ་གཟུགས་ལ་མེད། །
ས་ཆུ་མེ་རླུང་ནམ་མཁའ་མཚུངས་པ་འཇིག་རྟེན་དག་ན་ཐུན་མོང་སྟེ། །
མ་འདྲེས་ཉིད་ནི་རྡུལ་ཕྲན་ཙམ་ཡང་འཇིག་རྟེན་དག་ན་ཐུན་མོང་མིན། ། ?
Earth and the others have properties of specific character – their nature is not that of
space. Space's own intrinsic characteristic, non-obstruction, is absent in matter. Earth,
water, tire, air and space are equally common to all the worlds but not even so much as
an atom of the distinctive attributes of a Buddha is common to any of the worlds.
The nature of any of the properties native to earth and so on is not the nature of space.
Any of the features of space, such as being non-obstructive and so on, is not a feature of
the visible. Earth, water, fire, air and space, being equally lelements), have something in
common in the world. The unmixed qualities and worldly beings have nothing in
common, not even as much as a single atom.
Just like the sky does not
share the characteristics
of the other elements, the
eighteen uncommon
qualities are completely
distinct from those of
Shravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas
We have already heard the examples for the 32 qualities. The ten powers are like
a vajra, the four fearlessnesses are like a lion, and the sky is the example for the
eighteen distinctive qualities. The characteristics of the other elements do not
exist within the sky, and the characteristics of the sky or space are not found in
the other elements. Therefore they are distinctive. Likewise the Buddha's
qualities are completely distinctive from those of the Pratyekabuddhas and
Shravakas. And Maitreya adds that even this example is not distinctive enough,
because the elements of earth, water, wind, fire, and space are very common in
the mundane world, but Buddha's qualities are completely uncommon. Next we
will hear about the effect of maturation
The Fruit of Maturation (the 32 Major Marks)
257
ལེགས་གནས་འཁོར་ལོའི་མཚན་པ་དང་། 1
ཡངས་ཤིང་ཞབས་ལོང་མི་མངོན་དང་། ། |
སོར་མོ་རིང་དང་ཕྱག་ཞབས་ནི། །
དྲ་བ་ཡིས་ནི་འབྲེལ་པ་དང་།
1
Perfectly level and marked with wheels, his feet are broad and ankles unobtrusive.
Long are his fingers and toes, which are themselves interwebbed.
His perfectly even {soles) are marked with wheels. His feet are broad and his ankles are
not visible. His fingers and toes are long and the digits of his hand and feet are
entwined by a web.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
193



158
པགས་འཇམ་གཞོན་ཤ་ཅན་ལེགས་ཉིད། །
སྐུ་ནི་བདུན་དག་མཐོ་བ་དང་། །
བྱིན་པ་ཨེ་ན་ཡ་འདྲ་གསང་། །
གླང་པོ་བཞིན་དུ་སྦུབས་སུ་ནུབ། །
Soft is his skin and fine his youthful flesh. His body has seven elevated parts. Like an
antelope's are his calves and like an elephant's are his private parts recessed.
His skin is soft and his flesh remains youthful. His body has seven elevated and
rounded parts. His calves are like those of an antelope and his secret parts are hidden
as are an elephant's.
29
རོ་སྟོད་སེང་གེ་འདྲ་བ་དང་།
ཐལ་གོང་བར་མེད་རྒྱས་པ་དང་། །
དཔུང་མགོ་ལེགས་ཟླུམ་ཕྱག་འཇམ་ཞིང་
། །
ཟླུམ་ཞིང་མཐོ་དམན་མེད་པ་དང་
། །
His torso is like a lion's and clavicles not hollow but well-filled. His shoulders are
elegantly rounded and rounded, soft and even are his arms.
His {mightytorso is similar to that of a lion. The hollow] between his clavicles is well
filled. The curve of his shoulders is perfect and beautiful. His hands and arms are
rounded, soft and even.
26
ཕྱག་རིང་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པའི་སྐུ།
འོད་ཀྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་དང་ལྡན་དང་། །
མགྲིན་པ་དྲི་མེད་དུང་འདྲ་དང་། །
འགྲམ་པ་རི་དྭགས་རྒྱལ་པོ་འདྲ། །
His arms are long and his perfectly-pure body by an aura of light is surrounded. His
neck is like a conch and without blemish and cheeks like those of the king of beasts'.
His arms are long and his utterly immaculate body is enfolded in the mandala of an
aureole of light. His neck, unblemished ſin huel, resembles a conch. His cheeks are
like those of the king of all animals.
261
ཚེམས་ནི་བཞི་བཅུ་མཉམ་པ་དང་།
རབ་དག་ཚེམས་ཐགས་བཟང་བ་དང་།
རྣམ་དག་ཚེམས་མཉམ་ཉིད་དང་ནི། །
མཆེ་བ་རབ་མཆོག་དཀར་
ག་དཀར་བ་ཉིད།
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
194



Equal are his forty teeth. They are very pure and closely set, immaculate and evenly
aligned; the eye-teeth perfect and excellently white.
His forty teeth are equal (in number in both jaws). His teeth are supremely pure and
most beautifully set. They are totally immaculate and aligned in even rows. The eye-
teeth are of supreme and excellent whiteness.
262
ལྗགས་རིང་མཐའ་མེད་བསམ་མེད་པ། །
རོ་བྲོ་བ་ཡི་མཆོག་ཉིད་དང་།
།
རང་བྱུང་ཀ་ལ་པིང་ཀ་ཡི། །
སྒྲ་དང་ཚངས་པའི་དབྱངས་ཉིད་དང་། །
His tongue is long, unending and inconceivable, with the most perfect faculty of taste.
The spontaneously-born one has a voice like the song of the kalavinka bird or Brahma's
melody.
His tongue is long, his speech unlimited and inconceivable. His sense of taste is
supreme, and the Self-Sprung's voice s like the kalavinka's call and the melody of
Brahma.
263
སྤྱན་བཟང་ཨུཏྤལ་ཁྱུ་མཆོག་རྫི་འདྲ་དང་། །
ཞལ་མཛེས་དྲི་མེད་མཛོད་སྤུ་དཀར་ལྡན་དང་
། །
གཙུག་ཏོར་དབུ་ལྡན་དག་ཅིང་སྲབ་པ་དང་། །
པགས་པ་གསེར་གྱི་མདོག་འདྲ་སེམས་ཅན་མཆོག
The supreme of beings has beautiful eyes like blue lotuses, and like an ox's are his
eyelashes. With its immaculate white uma hair, his face is handsome to behold; his
head bears a mound and his skin is pure, fine and golden.
His pure eyes are like blue lotuses, his eyelashes (dense) as those of an ox. He has the
stainless white urna hair embellishing his face and the ushnisha crowning his head. His
skin is pure and delicate and of the colour of gold.
2644
བ་སྤུ་ལེགས་ཕྲ་འཇམ་ཞིང་རེ་རེ་ནས། །
སྐུ་ཡི་གྱེན་དུ་གཡས་ཕྱོགས་འཁྱིལ་བ་དང་། །
དབུ་སྐུ་དྲི་མེད་རིན་ཆེན་མཐོན་མཐིང་བཞིན། །
ནྱ་གྲོ་རྫོགས་པའི་ལྗོན་ཤིང་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་འདྲ། །
The hairs on his body are exceeding fine and soft, one from each and curling to the
right and to the top. His hair is impeccable and like a deep-blue gem. As well-rounded
as a perfect nyagrodha tree,
Extremely fine and soft, each of the hairs on his body curls from one pore to the right
and upwards to his crown. His immaculate hair resembles ſin colour] a deep blue gem.
Well-proportioned in stature like a perfect nyagrodha tree,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
195



265
ཀུན་ཏུ་བཟང་པོ་དཔེ་མེད་དྲང་སྲོང་ཆེ།
སྲེད་མེད་བུ་ཡི་སྟོབས་མངའ་མཁྲེགས་པའི་སྐུ། །
བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་པར་སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས་པོ། །
འདི་དག་སྟོན་པས་མི་དབང་མཚན་དུ་གསུངས། ། I
the ever-good and incomparable great sage has the strength or Narayana in his body
firm. These two and thirty marks, vividly brilliant and beyond any concept's grasp, are
by our teacher taught as those of a lord of men.
the Great Sage who is all-good and without any example has an unbreakable body
possessed of Narayana's strength. These thirty-two marks, which one cannot conceive
or grasp and which are resplendent in their brightness and beauty), the Teacher has
described as the signs of a lord of humans.
Some of the 32 major
marks are simply not
comprehensible
As I said at the beginning, some of these 32 major marks are simply not
comprehensible. And I also feel a little reluctant to talk about them, because my
words are the source of the destruction of other people's merit. Because of my
very limited and completely stupid mind, if I speak about these things it could
paint a very strange image of the Buddha that would not be at all good for you or
for me.
The chakravartins have a
set of 32 'similar major
marks, and other beings
may also have some of
these marks, but only
Buddha has a genuine and
complete set
There are several categories of these 32 major marks, for example there is also a
set of 32 “similar" marks that are not the real ones, but are very close. When
Buddha was born, the astrologer Asita said, “This boy will become either a great
king, a chakravartin, or if he renounces, then he will become a great liberator of
the world". It is believed that if Buddha had chosen the first career, then he
would only have the 32 "similar" major marks and not the real ones. This
indicates that all the chakravartins, the universal kings, also have these qualities.
And other beings may have also a few of them, perhaps fifteen or six or two. But
only the Buddha has a genuine and complete set. The 32 major marks are:
The 32 major marks
1) The soles of his feet are perfectly level or even, and they are marked with a
thousand-spoke wheel. He will never be drafted in the US Army - is it the
same in France?
2) His feet are quite broad. His heels are as broad as his entire feet, and you
cannot see his ankles. We can only try our best to imagine what this looks
like! Tulku Pema Wangyal Rinpoche says that you could not see the ankles of
HH Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche.
3) His fingers and toes are long, as long as his palms and the soles of his feet.
4) His fingers and toes are webbed, like the king of the swans. But when
Siddhartha was a prince, he wore rings on all his fingers, and they fitted very
nicely. Don't think he's like a duck. Also his fingers are even. None is
shorter or longer than any other. Likewise, his toes are even.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
196



The qualities of the
Buddha are inconceivable,
but we demand to
perceive them. The 32
major marks give us what
we want and what we
need
We are talking about unimaginable things. The qualities of the Buddha are
inconceivable and unperceivable, but we demand to perceive them. So this is
what we get! As I told you, he will always give us what we want and what we
need together - and this is it! We want him to have fingers, so he's giving us
some sort of fingers, but not really our kind of fingers.
5) He has soft skin and youthful flesh.
6) His two knees, two elbows, two shoulders and the nape of his neck are all
elevated.
7) His calves are like those of an antelope. Their shape is unlike ours.
8) His private parts are concealed in a recess, like an elephant. That's one of
the big qualities of the chakravartins.
9) His torso is mighty, like a lion's.
10) There is no hollow in the bone of his clavicles.
11) His shoulders are elegantly rounded.
12) His hands have no raised parts. They are entirely even.
13) He has long arms. He doesn't have to bend to touch his knees.
14) There is always light radiating from his body.
15) His neck is like a conch, the tip of the conch, without any dirt. It has rings
like a conch.
16) His cheeks are like the king of beasts, meaning a lion. They're quite
rounded.
17) He has 40 teeth, 20 in each of his upper and lower jaws - we only have 32 or
36.
18) His teeth are very clean and pure.
19) His teeth are set perfectly without some protruding and others behind.
20) His canines are very white and sharp.
We can't discuss this very much, so we will just go through the list.
21) He has a very long tongue, with no end. It's an inconceivable tongue.
Normally his tongue covers his whole face, like a dog.
22) His sense of taste is supreme. Whatever falls on his tongue becomes very
delicious, like horse food, oats I think. There's a story about when the king
forgot to offer alms to the Sangha for their summer retreat, and the whole
Sangha had to live with horse food. And Buddha had to eat the horse food,
and when the monks shared his leftovers, it was the most delicious food.
There's a whole story about it.
23) He has a voice with a melody with Brahma, or like a kalavinka, a nightingale.
His voice is very soothing.
24) He has long and big eyes, like blue utpala lotuses.
25) His eyelashes are dense and shining like an ox's. When they close, the upper
hairs and the lower hairs do not touch. The upper hairs fall right in between
the lower hairs.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
197



26) His face is beautiful, and it is adorned with the white urna hair. When you
pull it, it's supposedly about a foot long, and when you let go, it curls
anticiockwise.
27) He has an ushnisha on the crown of his head. That's very special, probably
the most supreme of all his 32 qualities.
28) He has pure and delicate skin.
29) His skin is golden-coloured.
30) His body is covered with fine and soft small hairs, and there are never two
hairs growing together. They don't grow downwards. They grow upwards
towards his head, and they are all curly, and they curl anticlockwise.
31) He has impeccable hair. His hair is indigo blue in colour, like the jewel of
tönting. I don't know the name in English. Perhaps it's like a lapis lazuli.
32) His whole body is like a nyagrodha tree. His height and his width with his
arms extended are the same. He has an incomparable body, and he has the
strength of Narayana. You find Narayana everywhere in Hindu mythology,
and he is supposedly very strong. He is the one who lifted the elephant's tait
when Indra killed the Asuras' elephant.
The 32 major marks are
the result of maturation,
and they are explained in
the Ratnadarika-sutra
So this, briefly, is the list of the 32 major marks. And let's not forget that they
are the result of the maturation of his purification and accumulation. And behind
each of them there are many stories (nampar tarpa). Most of these are explained
in the sutra requested by a girl called Rinchen, the Ratnadarika-sutra (bu mo rin
chen gyis zhus pa'i do).
For example, the
Buddha's feet are level
because he never broke
any promises or pledges
For instance, why are his feet level? This has lots to do with his past lives, when
he never broke any promise or pledge that he made. This wasn't just small
pledges, but also very big pledges. He gave so many pledges, for one word of
Dharma, or to save the life of a single sentient being. And he was very generous
with everything, with protection, gifts and Dharma, so that's why there are 1000-
spoked wheels on the sole of his feet. He has never abused or despised anyone,
so his feet are even and his ankles are not perceivable. And there are so many
stories about how he protected people from fear, such as fear of disasters, fear
of punishment from the rulers and so on. This is why his fingers are long. And
one of the causes of his ushnisha is that he stood on one leg for 21 days and
nights in praise to his guru Dipamkara, the first Buddha. At the end, Dipamkara
predicted that in the future, after many eons, that he would become the sage
called Shakyamuni.
One of the causes of his
ushnisha was that he
stood on one leg for 21
days and nights in praise
to his guru Dipamkara
This was a summary of the 32 major marks, and they will now be explained with
some examples.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point Qualities
198



266
ཇི་ལྟར་སྤྲིན་མེད་མཁའ་ཡི་ཟླ་བའི་གཟུགས།
སྟོན་ཀའི་ཆུ་སྔོན་མཚོར་ནི་མཐོང་བ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཁྱབ་བདག་གཟུགས། 1
རྫོགས་སངས་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ནང་དུ་མཐོང་བར་འགྱུར། །
just as the form of the autumn moon in a cloudless sky is seen on the azure waters of a
lake, so also are the all-embracing one's form kayas seen by all the victor's sons in the
perfect Buddha mandala.
just as in autumn the form of the moon is seen in a cloudless sky and in the deep blue
water of a lake, the form of the All-Embracing is seen by the Victor's heirs in the perfect
Buddha mandala fand in the world).
The 32 marks are like the
autumn moon in water,
symbolising that the
Buddha will always stand
out in a crowd
Like an autumn moon reflecting on the water, even though there may be trees or
flowers growing by the water, none of these will obstruct the reflection of the
moon. Likewise wherever the Buddha is dwelling and whoever is with him you
will not miss him, even if he is in the midst of 10,000 tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas,
10,000 ninth bhumi Bodhisattvas, many other people, and lots of mountains,
rivers, and rocks. Wherever you are, you will just find him. This is one of his
distinctive qualities. If one of us is in a crowd of people then it's hard to find us.
But unlike us, he cannot be lost. So the 32 major marks are symbolised by the
reflection of the moon.
267
ཡོན་ཏན་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་བཞི་པོ། །
འདི་དག་སོ་སོར་རྒྱུ་བཅས་ཏེ། །
གོ་རིམས་ཇི་བཞིན་རིན་ཆེན་གྱི།
མདོ་ཡི་རྗེས་འབྲང་ཤེས་པར་བྱ། !
One should know that these sixty-four qualities and their respective causes here follow
their order in the "Jewel Discourse" - the Ratna Sutra.
These sixty-four qualities each combined with its cause should be known in their order
to follow the Ratnadarikasutra.
The 64 qualities of the
Buddha are explained in
the Ratnadarika-sutra
Maitreya is saying that the order, character, explanation, reason, and cause of the
ten strengths, four fearlessnesses and so on are explained in the sutra requested
by lady Ratna
He will now conclude with a summary of how the examples and the qualities of
the Buddha complement each other.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
199



2%8
མི་ཕྱེད་པ་དང་མི་ཞན་དང་
། །
མཚུངས་པ་མེད་ཕྱིར་གཡོ་མེད་ཕྱིར། །
རྡོ་རྗེ་སེང་གེ་མཁའ་དག་པའི།
ཆུ་ཡི་ཟླ་བའི་དཔེས་བསྟན་ཏོ། །
Being invulnerable, undisheartened, peerless and motionless, they are illustrated by the
examples of a vajra, a lion, space and the clear moon in water.
Being unchangeable and never weakened, dissimilar and unmoving, they are taught by
the examples of the vajra, the lion, space and the moon in sky and water.
The ten strengths, four
fearlessnesses, eighteen
distinctive qualities and
32 major marks are like
the vajra, lion, space and
moon
The ten strengths or powers are symbolised by the vajra, because no obstacles
can dismantle the vajra. The four fearlessnesses are symbolised by the lion,
because the lion does not lose courage. The eighteen distinctive qualities are
symbolised by sky, because there is no other quality that is equal to the sky. The
32 major marks are like the moon in the water, because the 32 major marks
cannot be manipulated by conceptions. This is explained again in more detail.
2fi9
སྟོབས་སོགས་རྣམས་ལས་སྟོབས་དྲུག་དང་
། །
གསུམ་དང་གཅིག་གིས་རིམ་པ་བཞིན། །
ཤེས་བྱ་སྙོམས་
མས་པར་འཇུག་པ་དང་
། །
བག་ཆགས་བཅས་པ་ཀུན་བསལ་བས།
Of these powers and so on, six, three and one, have completely dispelled, respectively,
cognitive, meditative balance and those accompanied by their latent conditioning.
Of the powers, six powers, three and one, in this sequence, have totally dispelled the
veils of} knowledge and meditation, along with that of the remaining imprints.
27)
གོ་ཆ་རྩིག་པ་ཤིང་བཞིན་དུ་
ཕུག་དང་བཤིག་དང་བཅད་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
བརླིང་དང་སྙིང་བརྟན་མི་ཕྱེད་པས། །
དྲང་སྲོང་སྟོབས་ནི་རྡོ་རྗེ་འདྲ། །
Thus they have pierced, destroyed and felled the armour-like, wall-like and tree-like.
Being firm, resistant, steadfast and invulnerable, these powers of the sages are vajra-
like.
Resembling armour, a wall and a tree, they were pierced, shattered and felled. Being
firm, essential, steadfast and unchangeable the powers of the Great Sage are similar to a
vajra. .
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
200



Why the ten powers are
like a vajra
Again this is repeated. The sage's ten strengths or powers are like a vajra. The
first six of the ten strengths pierce through the armour of cognitive obscurations.
The next three strengths are like a vajra because they dismantle the wall of
meditative obscurations, and the tenth strength is like a vajra because it cuts the
root of defilements that are like a tree.
271
གང་ཕྱིར་བརླིང་བ་སྙིང་པོའི་ཕྱིར།
1
གང་ཕྱིར་སྙིང་པོ་བརྟན་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
གང་ཕྱིར་བརྟན་པ་མི་ཕྱེད་ཕྱིར། །
མི་ཕྱེད་ཕྱིར་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ་བཞིན། །
Why firm? Because they are resistant. Why resistant? Because they are steadfast. Why
steadfast? Because they are invulnerable. Since they are invulnerable they are like a
vajra.
Why are they firm? Because they are essential. Why essential? Because they are
steadfast. Why steadfast? Because they are unchangeable. Being unchangeable, they
are like a vajra.
They are firm because they are resistant, and they are resistant because they are
steadfast. They are steadfast because they are not subject to change, so they are
not vulnerable. This is why they are like a vajra. Next there is again the
summary of the four fearlessnesses.
272
འཇིགས་པ་མེད་ཕྱིར་ལྟོས་མེད་ཕྱིར།
བརྟན་ཕྱིར་རྩལ་ནི་ཕུན་ཚོགས་པས།
ཐུབ་པ་སེང་གེ་སེང་གེ་བཞིན། །
འཁོར་གྱི་ཚོགས་སུ་འཇིགས་མི་མངའ། །
Being fearless, unconcerned and stable, and since his skill is supreme, the lion of men,
the one triumphant, is likened to a lion - fearless in the midst of any gathering.
Since he is not intimidated, is independent, stable and {possessed of best possible skill,
the Muni is like a lion. The Lion of Mankind does not have fear in any assembly
whatever.
Why the four
fearlessnesses are like a
ljon
The great Muni is like a lion among men. The lion is not afraid when his retinue
surrounds him. The lion has no fear of anything. It is not dependent on
anything. It is stable, skilled and agile. Now we have the detailed explanation.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
201



273
ཀུན་མངོན་མཁྱེན་པས་གང་ལས་ཀྱང་
། །
འཇིགས་མེད་པར་ནི་རྣམ་པར་གནས། །
དག་པའི་སེམས་ཅན་དང་ཡང་བདག །
མི་མཉམ་གཟིགས་ཕྱིར་ལྟོས་པ་མེད། །
Having definite knowledge of everything, he stays absolutely fearless of anyone. Since
he clearly sees that even purified beings are not his peers, he remains uninfluenced.
Knowing everything directly, he always remains totally fearless of anyone, no matter of
whom. Seeing that even pure beings are not his equal, he is unimpressed and not
daunted by others.
274
ཐུགས་ནི་ཆོས་རྣམས་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ། ༣
རྩེ་གཅིག་ཕྱིར་ན་བརྟན་པ་ཉིད། །
མཆོག་ཏུ་མ་རིག་བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི། །
ས་ལས་བརྒལ་ཕྱིར་རྩལ་ལྡན་ནོ། །
Since his noble mind is constantly attentive to each and every phenomenon, he has
stability. Having transcended the state of latent ignorance, exceedingly difficult, he
possesses skilful mastery.
His mind being one-pointed as to all phenomena, ſhis samadhiſ is the quintessence of
stability. He possesses skill, having crossed the earth of the latencies of unknowing,
ever so subtle
The Buddha is fearless,
independent, stable and
agile with wisdom
No opponent can defeat the Sage, so the Sage does not fear any opponent. This
is because the Sage can answer any questions within the context of the three
times. The Sage is not dependent on anyone, because he is distinctive even
compared to the tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas, whose qualities are very close to the
Buddha's. This is why he doesn't have to depend on them. The Sage is stable,
because he is never swayed by dualistic phenomena. And the Sage is agile with
wisdom, because he has gone beyond the boundary of ignorance.
275
འཇིག་རྟེན་ཉན་ཐོས་མཐའ་གཅིག་ཏུ། །
སྤྱོད་དང་བློ་ལྡན་རང་བྱུང་རྣམས། །
གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་བློ་དག་ནི། །
ཕྲ་ཕྱིར་དཔེ་ནི་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ། །
Worldlings, Shravakas, those one sided, the wise and that which spontaneously arises -
their understanding being progressively subtler, can be exemplified through elements
five.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
202



The understanding of worldly beings, of listeners, of biased practitioners, of those who
have insight and of self-sprung Buddhas getting ever subtler and progressively refined,
there are five similes:
276
འཇིག་རྟེན་ཀུན་གྱི་ཉེར་འཚོའི་ཕྱིར། །
ས་ཆུ་མེ་རླུང་རྣམས་དང་མཚུངས།
འཇིག་རྟེན་འཇིག་རྟེན་འདས་པ་ཡི།
མཚན་ཉིད་ལས་འདས་ནམ་མཁའ་བཞིན། ། !
Buddhas are like earth, water, fire and air, being sustenance for all the worlds. They are
like space, being beyond the characteristics of both worldly existence and that which
transcends it.
Sustaining the life of all worldly beings, (Buddhas) are likened to earth and water and to
fire and air. Away from the teatures of the worldly and of those being beyond the
world, they are similar to space.
Why the eighteen
distinctive qualities are
like the sky or space
All this has been explained before, but it's repeated. It explains why the
eighteen distinctive qualities of the Buddha are distinctive. In increasing order of
subtlety the five elements are: earth, water, fire, wind, and space. For example,
water is subtler than earth. And the sky or space is the subtlest. Likewise there
are five types of beings: ordinary beings, Shravakas, Pratyekabuddhas,
Bodhisattvas and Buddhas. The first four elements have a slightly common
quality, like earth and water. But the quality of the sky is completely uncommon.
Likewise the qualities of the Bodhisattvas have some similarity with ordinary
beings, Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, but the qualities of the Buddha are
totally distinctive.
277
དེ་དག་ཡོན་ཏན་སུམ་ཅུ་ནི། །
གཉིས་འདི་ཆོས་སྐུས་རབ་ཕྱེ་སྟེ། །
ནོར་བུ་རིན་ཆེན་འོད་མདོག་དང་། །
དབྱིབས་བཞིན་དབྱེ་བ་མེད་ཕྱིར་རོ།
Into two and thiry qualities then are aspects of the dharmakaya made, though they are
as inseparable as a gem's colour, its brilliance and its shape.
So the dharmakaya fully divides into these thirty-two qualities, indivisible like a precious
gem in its light, radiance and shape.
The 32 qualities of the
dharmakaya can be
divided into three aspects
like a wishfulfilling jewel
has aspects of radiance,
colour and shape
The 32 qualities of the dharmakaya can be compared to a wishfulfilling jewel.
Like a jewel, they can be divided into three aspects. We can talk about a jewel's
light or radiance, its colour and its shape. Likewise we can talk about the
dharmakaya in three aspects.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
203



276
མཐོང་ན་ཚིམ་བྱེད་ཡོན་ཏན་གང་། །
སུམ་ཅུ་རྩ་གཉིས་ཞེས་བྱ་བ། །
སྤྲུལ་པ་ཆོས་ལ་རྫོགས་པར་ནི། །
ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་སྐགཉིས་མ་བརྟེན། །
Those attributes, which, when seen, contentment inspire, are known as the "two and
thirty" (marks) which are founded in the kayas two-the nirmanakaya and the
sambhogakaya which makes the Dharma perfect.
Granting satisfaction whenever they are seen, the qualities called "the thirty-two
{marksi" adhere to two kayas, being the illusory kaya and the kaya perfectly rejoicing in
Dharma .
279
དག་ལས་རིང་
རིང་དང་ཉེ་རྣམས་ལས། །
འཇིག་རྟེན་རྒྱལ་བའི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་དུ། །
ཆུ་དང་ནམ་མཁའ་ཟླ་གཟུགས་བཞིན།
དེ་མཐོང་
ང་བ་ནི་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས། །
Those far from purity and those close to il see these in two ways - as being in the world
or as the mandala of the victors - like the form of the moon, beheld in water or in
space.
Those far from and close to purity (see them as the mandalas of the world and the
Victor, like the form of the moon in water and sky. Thus these {kayas) are beheld in two
ways. .
Ordinary beings can see
the 32 major marks
indirectly, like a reflection
of the moon in water
The 32 major marks satisfy your mind. Here we are talking about an audience.
We are talking about manifestation and sentient beings whose minds obtain
satisfaction. So this is actually the quality of the nirmanakaya and
sambhogakaya. For some ordinary sentient beings, those who have merit, and
also for Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, they see Buddhas with all these
qualities such as the 32 major marks. But their kind of perception is like the
reflection of the moon in water. All that they see is a reflection of the
sambhogakaya, meaning the nirmanakaya.
Bodhisattvas can see the
32 major marks directly,
like seeing the real moon
in the sky
But the Bodhisattvas are able to see the 32 major marks directly. And that is like
actually seeing the real moon in the sky. Since only the Bodhisattvas can see the
sambhogakaya, there are two ways of perceiving these kayas. That's the end of
the third chapter, the chapter on the qualities of enlightenment.
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་རིགས་རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་བ་ལས།
ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་སྐབས་ཏེ་གསུམ་བའོ།། །།
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
204



This was the third chapter, on the qualities, from the Analysis of the Potential for the
Rare and Supreme, in this Ultimate Mahayana Treatise on the Changeless Continuity of
the True Nature.
This was the section "Qualities", the third chapter of The Commentary on the Highest
Continuity of the Mahayana Dharma that Analyzes the Disposition of the Rare and the
Sublime Ones.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
205



Chapter Four
The Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
Day 5
Introduction
How to listen to the
teachings
I would like to remind you to listen to these teachings with the motivation of
renouncing samsara and wishing for enlightenment, not just for yourself but also
for all sentient beings. The past Bodhisattvas have sacrificed their bodies, their
belongings, and their kingdoms just for one word of the Dharma. And ordinary
beings like us have also sacrificed our bodies, our wealth, and our kingdoms so
many times - but for all kinds of useless things, rather than one word of the
Dharma. For instance, in this tent each one of us must have sacrificed our life
and given up our time and everything for someone else. Each of us must have
caused others the suffering of broken heartedness. And I'm sure some of us are
causing it right now as we are talking! And it's all for nothing. And it looks like
we are going to continue doing this. Whereas if you could sacrifice even a little
bit of your devotion for one word of the Dharma, there would be so much
benefit, not only for you but for many others.
And the words of the Dharma, the path of the Buddha, are not like other paths.
The path of the Buddha is painless, which is why we call it the path of the
Sugatas. For instance, during the past few days we have been hearing a few
drops out of the infinitely vast and deep qualities of the Buddha, even though
they are inconceivable and unthinkable. Even to remember the Triple Gem, or to
hear the name of the Triple Gem, that alone must indicate that we have so much
merit.
The merit of hearing the
name of the Triple Gem
The benefits of hearing
about the Buddha:
Relatively, we are
reminded of gentleness,
love and compassion.
Ultimately, we understand
that our nature is that
very Buddha. We already
have all the Buddha
qualities
By hearing the name of the Buddha, contemplating it, and doing a little bit of
meditation on the Buddha, we accumulate so much merit on the relative level. At
the very least, we are remembering someone who is walking gently, loving and
kind, which reminds us of gentleness, love, and compassion instead of us
remembering and getting caught up in sibling rivalries and family disputes that
cause centuries of war and conflict in societies. On the more ultimate level, by
hearing and contemplating the Buddha, we understand that we have that very
Buddha. Our nature is that very Buddha. We don't have to envy an externally
existing figure called Buddha, this guy Siddhartha who came 2500 years ago. We
have all his qualities, complete - not one less, not one more. We have exactly the
same measurement, weight, everything. We don't have to envy him. We don't
have to wait for a prophet that's supposedly going to come later. You have those
qualities within your being.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
206



The benefits of hearing
about the Dharma:
Relatively, we are
reminded of the truth of
impermanence
Ultimately, all extremes
simply evaporate
By hearing the words of the Dharma on the relative level, it reminds you of the
truth that all compounded things are impermanent. So if you don't have a Ferrari
today, perhaps you might have one tomorrow. And if you feel terrible about
yourself, that you're an ultimately evil being, then you know there's hope, as
there's a chance that your badness will go. And at least you have to pretend that
you want to pursue non-violence. On the ultimate level when you hear the
Dharma, think about it and contemplate it, all kinds of extremes simply
evaporate. It's a bit like somebody who is falling from a cliff, and just before he
falls he manages to grab onto some dry grass whose roots are coming out. You
are so afraid that you will fall, but when you really contemplate and practice the
Dharma, suddenly you have the wit to look down and you realise there's no cliff.
And the funny thing is the very moment you realise there's no cliff is when the
grass comes out.
The benefits of hearing
about the Sangha:
Relatively, we feel we can
be vessels to practice the
truth, and we behave a
little better
By hearing about the Sangha, and contemplating on the Sangha, on the relative
level we feel that we can be vessels to practice and use this truth. At least, we
are forced to behave a little better, such as partially becoming vegetarian, or
reluctantly becoming a monk. And on the ultimate level, by hearing,
contemplating and meditating on the Sangha, we realise that we all have the
potential - all sentient beings, not only myself. And you also realise, as stated by
Maitreya, that every being can be the ultimate object of refuge. Everybody's
nature is definitely the ultimate object of refuge, so you have no choice but to be
non-sectarian. So at this age and time, we can say that even to have this
opportunity hear the name of the Triple Gem is the activity of the Buddha.
Ultimately, we realise that
all sentient beings have
the potential for
enlightenment
When we talk about the
Buddha's activity, we
must talk about the
audience. Does the
Buddha hear our prayers?
Today we are beginning the chapter on the activity of the Buddha. When we talk
about activity, we are talking about beings to be tamed (dülja), so we are talking
about an audience, about disciples. It's important to understand these things if
we are to understand so-called supplications and prayers. Do the Buddhas hear
and understand our supplications or not? Do they completely fulfil the wishes of
whoever is supplicating or not? In a way it's so easy, as there is no truly existing
Buddha externally. But on the relative level, there is a Buddha who came, who
was born in Lumbini and all of that. We can distinguish between the 'real'
Buddha, the dharmakaya, and the rupakayas, which are like a manifestation.
Ignorant beings like us cannot communicate with the ultimate Buddha, the
dharmakaya. And there's something quite amazing about these manifestations,
as the sambhogakaya is perceivable, but not by everyone, and the nirmanakaya
can only be understood by those who have merit.
Ignorant beings like us
cannot communicate with
the 'real' Buddha, the
dharmakaya. And even
the rupakayas can only be
perceived by certain
beings
The nirmanakaya is the
outermost manifestation,
and always appears as a
serene, humble, simple
renunciant. This form is
what the general audience
both wants and needs
When we talk about the three kayas, especially the nirmanakaya, we're talking
about the outermost manifestation. And the outermost is always in nirmanakaya
form, a renunciant who appears as serene, humble and simple. There are many
reasons for choosing this form, and it's both what we want and what we need.
We want our so-called teacher or master to be serene. We're talking particularly
about the most general audience here. Special audiences don't care! For them,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
207



We should contemplate
why Buddha chose this
outermost manifestation
there are manifestations like herukas, which are beyond our imagination! You
should contemplate why Buddha chose for his outermost manifestation someone
serene, humble, walking barefoot, and begging alms. After all, begging is
considered a lowly thing to do, especially these days, but it's something he did
almost every day.
Although we can say that
sambhogakaya
manifestations like
herukas are higher', we
determine hierarchy in
terms of the audience, so
muni Buddha is
supreme
When we talk about sovereignty, there's another good example. In Orgyen
Tobgyal Rinpoche's monastery, the main statue is a Guru Rinpoche and there is
also a big heruka statue, and many other statues of herukas and dakinis. And on
a side wall, not on the main shrine, there's a painting of a standing Buddha,
walking and begging alms. It's not the main figure. The main figure is Guru
Rinpoche and all these herukas, dakas and dakinis. So we're both looking at the
statues, and suddenly he says "You know, these guys can think whatever they
want to think, about being the most supreme heruka, the supreme guru and all
of that", and then he points at the Buddha and says, “But if this guy suddenly
walked into this room, all these deities would have to stand up and bow down to
him". And if Shakyamuni Buddha were sitting somewhere and all these herukas
and sambhogakaya Buddhas with their attributes and retinues were to come in,
he wouldn't even have to pay attention. He could ignore them. You see,
Shakyamuni Buddha is the king right now. During this period, he's the
sovereign. We can say nirmanakaya is the outermost, so sambhogakaya is
higher, so to speak, and therefore the herukas are higher. But when we talk
about sovereignty, then we're talking about hierarchy in terms of the audience.
And this is why Shakyamuni Buddha is supreme among all the Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas.
When we supplicate to the
Buddha, that is already
the activity of the Buddha.
We do not have to wait for
blessings sometime later
We were talking about the concept of supplication. For example, Shariputra had
this. He has the capacity to supplicate to the Buddha. But Devadatta didn't have
it. I'm telling you this because today we're talking about the activity of the
Buddha. And you will hear that the fact you are supplicating, and that you know
how to supplicate, is already the activity of the Buddha. It's not as though you
first do supplication and prayers and only then comes the activity of the Buddha,
giving you blessings and all that. As Shantideva said, in this darkness, a
momentary wish to supplicate or actually performing supplication is already the
act of the Buddha. The very moment you have done that, you have received the
blessing. You don't have to hit the 'enter' button to send it and then wait for a
reply.
For example, we prostrate
in order to crush our
pride, and the very act of
prostrating is already
starting to crush our pride
Once you know this, then you'll understand concepts like the Seven Branch
Offering, the accumulation of merit, turning the wheel of the Dharma, requesting
to remain forever, and things like that. You don't have to wait for the result. The
supplication itself is already a result. For instance, why do we prostrate? So we
can crush our pride. As you prostrate, it is already beginning to crush your pride
to a certain extent. This is so important. Even the Buddha himself, before he
taught, prostrated to the seat where he was about to sit and teach. Similarly,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
208



Similarly, the very wish to
receive the Dharma is
already beginning to
defeat wrong views
asking to turn the wheel of the Dharma is supposedly an antidote for ignorance
and wrong views, and the very wish to receive the Dharma is already beginning to
defeat wrong views. It's the antidote for ignorance.
At a glance these stanzas
are not difficult, but as we
contemplate and practice,
our understanding will
deepen over the years
This was just a general background. As we go through the stanzas, at a glance
they are not that difficult. But of course it's endless, and these are the words of
a 10th bhumi Bodhisattva. You can contemplate a stanza, practice, pray, and read
it again after ten years and you'll hear and understand something different. It's a
bit like practicing Chinese bamboo painting. The first time when you paint, it
looks OK, but you can practice it forever, and it's still not that OK.
280
1
གདུལ་བྱའི་ཁམས་དང་འདུལ་བའི་ཐབས་དང་ནི།
གདུལ་བྱའི་ཁམས་ཀྱི་གདུལ་བྱའི་བྱ་བ་དང་། །
དེ་ཡི་ཡུལ་དང་དུས་སུ་གཤེགས་པ་ལ། །
ཁྱབ་ དག་རྟག་ཏུ་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པར་འཇུག །
With respect to the temperaments of students, the means for training them, the trainings
which are suited to their temperaments, and their movements in terms of time and
space, the all-embracing are always spontaneous in their acts.
An all-Embracing One always has spontaneous access to the disciples' temperaments,
the means of training, the various trainings that suit their temperaments and to seeking
them wherever they are, at the right time.
Buddha is spontaneous,
because he knows beings'
elements, motivations and
intentions
This stanza talks about how Buddha is spontaneous. He knows sentient beings'
elements, motivations, and underlying or latent intentions. Many of the great
masters of our time have this. With some of these masters, you see some of
their students and you really wonder how can these guys practice Dharma. Then
they go to these masters, and within ten days even the colour of their
complexion has changed.
Therefore he knows how
to tame beings
The story of the poor girl
who repaired the hole in
the Buddha's robes
And the Buddha knows how to tame beings. He knows where they are, and
where to place them, for example, onto the higher realms for the time being, or
directly to enlightenment. For instance, when Buddha was in Magadha, once
there was a small hole in his robes and his monks wanted to stitch it, but the
Buddha said "No, not today". He walked out begging alms, and met a very poor
girl who was so poor that she didn't have anything to wear. Buddha went to her
begging alms, and everybody was surprised. And when she saw the hole in his
robes she offered to stitch it and Buddha let her do that. And as she was
stitching, it's believed that Shariputra saw a palace newly constructed for her in
Tushita heaven, so that immediately after she died she would be reborn in that
heaven. But instead of heaven, she became Buddha's disciple, and became one
of the most prominent nuns.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
209



Buddha will not teach just
because he has
knowledge. He wilt
function when the
situation is right
And Buddha knows when to tame beings. Buddha never manifests and teaches
because just because he has knowledge, because he has a degree so to speak.
He will function when the time, the place and the elements are right, when the
situation is right. For instance he did not exhibit his miraculous powers
immediately. It was long afterwards, with some tirthika masters who were
creating disputes in Shravasti. Basically, he always chooses the right time.
The story of Buddha and
his younger brother
Nanda
And he tamed his own younger brother, Nanda, much later. Nanda was in love
with a beautiful courtesan and they were very much in love, always stroking and
embracing each other. They were really inseparable, and one day Shakyamuni
Buddha decided it was the time to see his brother. And so he went to Nanda's
palace. Nanda was a prince, but he was usually too busy lovemaking to have
time for royal messengers or whoever. He would always say, "come later", or
send his servants to deal with it. But when Shakyamuni Buddha came, he
couldn't refuse him. This is one of the Buddha's qualities. Because he never said
no or refused a request from anyone who asked for help in all his many lifetimes,
no one can really refuse him. So Nanda had to go out, thinking "Oh god, that
man!" And Nanda's queen put a saliva mark on his forehead, saying that he had
to be back before it was dry.
And when he went to the door, Buddha was there begging alms. And of course,
Nanda offered something and hurried to go back in. But Buddha said, “Wait,
want to show you something. I want to take you somewhere", and again Nanda
couldn't refuse. So Buddha took him on a trip to Kailash and during the journey
they saw a female monkey, and Buddha pointed to the monkey and asked, "Who
do you think is more beautiful, this monkey or your wife?" Nanda replied, "Of
course my wife". Their journey continued, and Buddha said, “Let's go to Tushita
heaven", and upon arrival, they saw a big palace, with a throne, bathtubs, and
many beautiful goddesses cleaning and making all kinds of arrangements. And
Buddha asked Nanda, "Who is more beautiful, your wife or these girls?" Nanda
said, "Well, compared to these girls, my wife is like the monkey". And Buddha
told Nanda to ask the goddesses what they were doing, and they said "Well, on
earth there's a guy called Nanda, he's soon going to become a monk, and
because of that merit when he dies he'll be reborn here, and we're all waiting to
serve him".
So they went back to earth, and immediately Nanda became a monk. But Buddha
told his other disciples, including his other cousin Ananda, that from then on all
the other monks should not be around Nanda. They should not eat with him,
walk with him, or sleep with him. He should be isolated and live separately.
Buddha said, “You guys are aiming for something different from him, so you
should live separately". After several months Nanda became very sad, because
he had no friends and nobody was talking to him. So he went to Buddha and
asked everybody was avoiding him. So Buddha said, "OK let's go for another
trip". This time they went to the hell realm, where there were all kinds of hideous
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
210



sights. And in one corner there was a big cauldron with boiling water and
attendants of Yama preparing wood and all kinds of torture implements. And
again Buddha sent Nanda to ask them what are they doing. They told him,
"There's someone called Nanda who's now a monk, and because he's a monk,
he's going to heaven. But that power of merit will exhaust. And because he has
accumulated all kinds of non-virtuous actions, that will throw him right into this
cauldron where we're going to boil him".
Buddha's activities are
spontaneous because he
knows what is required to
teach his disciples
Likewise, Buddha's activities are always spontaneous because he knows all that is
required to teach his disciples.
281
ཡོན་ཏན་རིན་ཆེན་མཆོག་ཚོགས་དང་ལྡན་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆུ་མཚོ་བསོད་ནམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཉི་འོད་ཅན། |
ཐེག་པ་མ་ལུས་ངེས་པར་བསྒྲུབས་ཏེ་མཐའ་དང་དབུས་མེད་རྒྱ་ཆེན་ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟར་ཁྱབ་པ།
སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད་ནི་ཡོན་ཏན་དྲི་མ་མེད་གཏེར་སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན་ལ་ཁྱད་མེད་རྣམ་གཟིགས་ནས། །
ཉོན་མོངས
ངས་ཤེས་བྱའི་སྤྲིན་གྱི་དྲ་བ་སངས་རྒྱས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཐུགས་རྗེའི་རླུང་གིས་རྣམ་པར་གཏོར། !
Endowed with jñana's mighly sea, full with a multitude of gem-like qualities, and with
the sunlight of virtue and jñana, the Buddhas have achieved all yanas. Without middle
or end-exceedingly vast, Buddhahood is all-pervading, just like space. Perfectly
seeing that this treasure of unsullied qualities is in every being, without the slightest
distinction, they dispel defilements' and knowledge's cloud lattices with the wind of
their perfect compassion.
Having multitudes of supremely precious qualities and the waters of the ocean of
primordial wisdom, possessing the sunlight of merit and wisdom, it is the definitive
accomplishment of all vehicles without exception. Enlightenment is vast, without
middle or end and thus all-pervasive like space. Fully seeing that Buddhahood, the
treasure of the unpolluted qualities, is {present within all sentient beings without the
slightest distinction, the wind of the Buddhas' sublime compassion totally dispels the
clouds of afflictions and hindrances to knowledge, which have spun their net about it.
Buddha's sky-like
enlightenment is the fruit
of perfecting the
accomplishment of merit
and wisdom during the
ten bhumis
This stanza is so beautiful. It talks about why Buddha's activity is uninterrupted.
He has so many great qualities such as the enlightened samadhis, and he has
accomplished all these qualities by going through this ocean-like or water-like
wisdom, which refers to the ten bhumis. After going through the ten bhumis he
has perfected or accomplished the accumulation of merit and accumulation of
wisdom, which is like the sun. And the result or fruit of all these samadhis and
stages of the Bodhisattva is like the sky-like enlightenment.
Buddha's activity is
uninterrupted because he
knows his Buddhahood is
the same as the Buddha-
nature of sentient beings
This is the real reason his activity is uninterrupted. Buddha knows that this
stainless element (kham), this stainless Buddha that he has achieved is not the
slightest bit different from the Buddha that exists within sentient beings, which is
why his activity just cannot be interrupted. So where does the activity fit in here?
His compassion is like the wind that destroys the temporary clouds, the
temporary defilements, and that kind of confidence is possible because Buddha
knows there is not the slightest difference between his Buddhahood and sentient
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
211



beings' Buddha-nature. That is why his activity cannot be interrupted. For
example, let's suppose you forget to pray today, it doesn't mean that his activity
stops or that you're not a Buddhist for the next 500 lifetimes. It doesn't mean
that he stops.
That was the summary. Now the detailed explanation begins, but that also has a
summary. That's how Lord Maitreya talks. He is a god, not a human being. And
I guess this is how they talk, very detailed and very relaxed.
282
གང་ཞིག་གང་གིས་གདུལ་བ་ཡི། །
བྱ་གང་གང་དུ་གང་གི་ཚེ། །
དེ་ཡི་རྣམ་རྟོག་སྐྱེ་མེད་ཕྱིར། །
ཐུབ་ང་རྟག་ཏུ་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ། །
Since thoughts of "for whom", "by what means", "through what training", "where" and
"when" do not arise, these masters of wisdom are spontaneous at all times:
:
For whom? How? By which training? Where? And when? Since ideation as to such
[questions does not occur, the Muni always acts} spontaneously.
Buddha knows how to
tame sentient beings. He
acts spontaneously as he
has no conception
Which sentient beings are to be tamed, where, when and how? The Buddha
knows all this because he does not have any conception, so all of it is
spontaneous.
233
གདུལ་བྱའི་ཁམས་ནི་གང་ཞིག་གི །
གདུལ་བའི་ཐབས་མང་གང་གང་གིས། །
གདུལ་བྱའི་བྱ་གང་གང་དུ་ནི། །
གང་ཚེ་ཡུལ་དང་དུས་དེ་དག །
"For whom" - the temperaments of those to be trained, "by what means" - which of the
many training techniques, "through what training" – which actions to use to train them
and "where and when" - on what occasion.
The temperaments of the disciples, which of the many means for each, which training at
what place and time: {He is not mistaken as to any of these.
234
ངེས་འབྱིན་དེ་ཡི་སྟོན་པ་དང་
། །
དེ་འབྲས་དེ་ཡི་ཡོངས་འཛིན་དང་། །
དེ་སྒྲིབདེ་གཆོད་རྐྱེན་ལ་ནི། །
རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ་མེད་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
212



Buddha-activity is unceasing because it is devoid of conceptualizing with regard to true
freedom, freedom's support, the fruit of freedom, authentic possession of this fruit, the
obscurations which veil it and the necessary conditions for breaking through them.
Since, with regard to the definitive revelation of release, its support, its fruit, those being
fully sustained, their obscurations and the condition cutting these veils, there is no
ideation, (Buddha activity is uninterrupted.)
285
ངེས་པར་འབྱིན་པ་ས་བཅུ་སྟེ།
ཚོགས་གཉིས་དག་ནི་དེ་ཡི་རྒྱུ། །
དེ་འབྲས་བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་ཡིན་ཏེ། །
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ཅན་ཡོངས་སུ་འཛིན། !
Į
Genuine release is the ten levels; its cause is the two accumulations. Its fruit is supreme
enlightenment; an enlightenment beings really possess.
The ten levels definitively reveal release. The two accumulations provide their cause.
Supreme enlightenment is the fruit of these. Enlightenment in beings is fully sustained.
286
དེ་སྒྲིབ་མཐའ་ཡས་ཉོན་མོངས་དང་
། །
ཉེ་བའི་ཉོན་མོངས་བག་ཆགས་སོ། །
1
རྐྱེན་ནི་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་ཡིན། །
དུས་ཀུན་དུ་ནི་དེ་འཇོམས་པའི།
its obscuring veils are the endless defilements, the subsidiary defilements and the
fatencies. Great compassion is the condition for destroying these.
These are obscured by the endless afflictions, the secondary afflictions and the
latencies. A Buddha's great compassion is the condition that, at all times, vanquishes
these /veils.
The Mahayana path is
called the 'path that
extracts', as it extracts
our Buddha-nature from
temporary defilements
When Buddhas act, they manifest in six fashions without any conception. The
whole Mahayana path, the Bodhisattva path, is also called the path that extracts"
(nyejin gyi lam). We all have Buddha-nature that is cocooned and wrapped by
defilements, so we're extracting it from these temporary defilements. When we
talk about that path, we're talking about the ten bhumis (sa chu). And the path
produces two kinds of accumulations: the accumulation of merit and
accumulation of wisdom. The two accumulations are like a cause that generates
all the virtuous qualities during the ten bhumis. And the result, or the fruit of
these two accumulations is enlightenment (changchub). What does Buddha
activity do? It eliminates defilements. And upon which object does Buddha
manifest? Sentient beings. And the condition to eliminate defilements is great
compassion (thujey chenpo).
Buddha activity eliminates
the defilements of
sentient beings with great
compassion
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
213



One of the most
important causes for
Buddha activity is that
sentient beings have
Buddha-nature
One of the most important causes for the Buddha's activity is that sentient
beings have the potential to reach enlightenment. This is very important. If
sentient beings didn't have Buddha-nature, then Buddha activity wouldn't work.
There are two kinds of defilements that obstruct this Buddha-nature, and the
condition that triggers the action of clearing the defilements is compassion. This
is how an enlightened being holds and does not let go of the object, sentient
beings. All this is explained once again with an example.
287
གནས་དྲུག་པོ་ནི་འདི་དག་རྣམས། །
གོ་རིམས་ཇི་བཞིན་རྒྱུ་མཚོ་དང་
། །
ཉི་མ་དང་ནི་ནམ་མཁའི་གཏེར། །
སྤྲིན་དང་རླུང་བཞིན་ཤེས་པར་བྱ། །
These six points should be known as respectively being like an ocean, the sun, space, a
treasure, clouds and the wind.
These six points: being similar to an ocean, the sun, space, a treasure, clouds and wind
are to be grasped accordingly.
Buddha activity manifests
in six ways
The six fashions or ways of manifesting Buddha activity are like the examples
that follow.
288
ཤེས་ཆུ་ཡོན་ཏན་རིན་ཆེན་དང་། །
ལྡན་ཕྱིར་ས་རྣམས་རྒྱུ་མཚོ་བཞིན། ། !
སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཉེར་འཚོའི་ཕྱིར། །
ཚོགས་གཉིས་དག་ནི་ཉི་མ་བཞིན། །
The levels are like an ocean whose waters are jñana and which possesses the qualities
as its ocean's gems. The two-accumulations are like the sun, since by them all beings
are sustained.
Holding wisdom's waters and qualities like gems, the levels are like an ocean. Closely
sustaining all sentient beings, the two accumulations are like the sun.
The ten bhumis are like
an ocean filled with
jewels, and the two
accumulations are like the
sun that ripens the fruit
The bhumis are like an ocean. The ocean contains so many jewels and has so
many incredible attributes, and likewise the ten bhumis have infinite,
immeasurable wealth. The two accumulations of merit and wisdom are like the
sun, because the sun ripens the fruit. This is an amazing example for the
concept of accumulation of merit, things like offering butterlamps and all that.
When the sun ripens the fruit, it just happens spontaneously. The sun doesn't
think, "I'm going to ripen that apple". The sun comes and provides heat, and
fruit that is exposed is ripened, and fruit that is somewhere in a cave doesn't get
ripened.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
214



289
རྒྱ་ཆེ་མཐའ་དང་དབུས་མེད་ཕྱིར། །
བྱང་ཆུབ་ནམ་མཁའི་ཁམས་བཞིན་ནོ།
ཡང་དག་རྫོགས་སངས་ཆོས་ཉིད་ཕྱིར།
སེམས་ཅན་ཁམས་ནི་གཏེར་དང་འདྲ།
Enlightenment is like space, being vast, centreless and without end. The basic
character of beings is like a treasure, being the very nature of utterly perfect
enlightenment.
Being vast and without any middle or end, enlightenment is like the element of space.
Genuine perfect awakening is Dharmata, hence beings' nature is like a treasure.
Enlightenment is like
unchanging space and
sentient beings are like a
treasure mine that is the
source of wealth
Enlightenment is like the sky or space. All kinds of things happen within space,
but the space itself doesn't change. Sentient beings are like a treasure mine.
This is such an encouraging example. You dig for treasures and wealth in a
mine. Wealth comes from the mine, and likewise Buddhas come from sentient
beings, so sentient beings are like a mine.
19]
གློ་བུར་ཁྱབ་དང་མ་གྲུབ་ཕྱིར།
དེ་ཡི་ཉོན་མོངས་སྤྲིན་ཚོགས་བཞིན། །
དེ་འཐོར་བར་ནི་ཉེར་གནས་ཕྱིར། །
ཐུགས་རྗེ་མི་བཟད་རླུང་དང་འདྲ། །
The covering defilements are like cloud-hosts, being fleeting, pervasive and not entities.
Compassion is like a mighty wind, being ever-present to dispel them.
Adventitious, pervasive and not existent, its afflictions are like a host of clouds. Always
ready to dispel these fafflictions), compassion is similar to a merciless wind.
Defilements are like
adventitious clouds, and
compassion is like the
wind that disorganises the
rational world of samsara
Defilements are like clouds. They are adventitious and removable, not what it is.
Compassion is like the wind. It destroys, scatters, creates chaos, and
disorganises the systematic, samsaric, rational world of 1 + 1 = 2 and all that.
These are amazing examples! Only Maitreya can think of things like this. Usually
we think compassion is like honey, something sticky, gluey and all that. Now he
will conclude the summary, and then we will have the actual extended
explanation.
.
291
གཞན་གྱི་དབང་གིས་ངེས་འབྱུང་དང་
།
བདག་དང་སེམས་ཅན་མཚུངས་གཟིགས་དང་། །
མཛད་པ་ཡོངས་སུ་མ་རྫོགས་ཕྱིར།
འཁོར་བ་སྲིད་དུ་མཛད་མི་འཆད། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
215



Since their release is for others' benefit, since they see the equality of themselves and
beings and since their deeds have not been fully completed, their activity is unbroken
until samsara's end.
Their release fis accomplished for the sake of others. They see the equality of
themselves and sentient beings and their activity is not completed to its full extent. Thus
their deeds will never cease while samsara exists.
There are three causes
why the activity of the
Buddha is inexhaustible:
1) His renunciation was
for the sake of liberating
all sentient beings
By contrast, we have
renunciation only rarely,
and it's directed only at
our own petty problems
The activity of the Buddha is inexhaustible. It continues until samsara ends.
Because first of all, when Buddha was a Bodhisattva he had renunciation mind,
and the main cause of his renunciation mind was seeing the pain and suffering of
other sentient beings. It wasn't as though he was fed up with this worldly life
just for himself. He didn't just want to have fun himself, alone. This is an
incredible message. First of all most of us don't even have renunciation mind.
But if we do have it, once in a blue moon, it's usually because we are tired with
our own petty problems. We're tired with our boss or colleagues or friends or
relatives, and so we want to have an extended picnic! But when Buddha
renounces these things it's not so much because he's going through pain or
because he's unhappy, but because others are going through all these problems.
That's something different. It's one cause why Buddha activity will never end.
2) Buddha sees that he is
no different from the
nature of sentient beings
The second cause why Buddha activity will never end is that he sees there's not
the slightest difference between him and the nature of sentient beings.
3) He knows that
defilements are
removable
And third, he knows that defilements are removable. They're not that much of a
big deal, so it's not a hopeless case. And who proved that? He did, because he
has achieved it himself. So he has the driving force to bring others to reach there
as well.
Now all this will be explained with some examples.
292
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་རྔ་སྤྲིན་ཚངས་པ་དང་
། །
ཉི་མ་ནོར་བུ་རིན་ཆེན་བཞིན། །
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་སྒྲ་བརྙན་བཞིན། །
ནམ་མཁའ་དང་ནི་མ་བཞིན་ནོ། །
Like Indra, the drum, clouds, Brahma, the sun, a wishfulfilling gem, [an echol, space
and earth is the tathagata.
A tathagata is similar to Indra, the drum {of the gods), clouds, to Brahma, the sun, a
precious gem, to an echo, to space and the earth.
There are nine examples
for Buddha activity
The examples for Buddha activity are Indra, the drum, clouds, Brahma, sun, gem,
sound, space and earth.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
216



Example #1: Indra's Reflection On The Lapis Lazuli
Floor
293
ཇི་ལྟར་བོ་ཌཱུར་དག་པ་ཡི། 1
རང་བཞིན་ས་སྟེང་འདིར་འགྱུར་ཏེ། ། 1
དག་ཕྱིར་ལྷ་ཡི་དབང་པོ་དེར། །
ལྷ་ཡི་བུ་མོའི་ཚོགས་དང་བཅས། །
If the ground here had the quality of flawless lapis-lazuli, then one would see appear in
it, through its clarity, the king of gods accompanied by hosts of young goddesses,
If the surface of the ground here changed into the nature of immaculate lapis lazuli,
because of its purity one would see it the appearance of the Lord of all Gods with his
following of many young goddesses.
294
རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་བའི་ཁང་བཟང་དང་། 1
ལྷ་གནས་དེ་ལས་གཞན་དག་དང་། །
1
དེ་ཡི་གཞལ་ཡས་སྣ་ཚོགས་དང་
།
ལྷ་རྫས་རྣམ་མང་དེ་མཐོང་ངོ། །
“perfectly Victorious" – his resplendent palace, the divine abodes, other places with
various wonders and all the many kinds of enjoyments that gods possess.
One would see his sublimely beautiful palace "the All-Victorious" and other divine
abodes, the gods' various palaces and manifold wealth.
#1: Indra's reflection on
the lapis lazuli floor
The first example is the reflection of Indra. We call him Gyachin because he has
achieved that form by making hundred kinds of offerings. It's Hindu stuff! This
is a very long example, and it's more of a hypothetical example. And there are
also examples like this, stories actually, in the Hindu mythology. I don't know
whether we should call it 'mythology'. I don't think so. I've got a little bit of a
soft spot for Hindus myself. Indra is supposedly very powerful and a product of
a lot of merit. There are 33 Indras, and here we're talking about the main one.
He also manifests as 32 other kings, and he's also father of many prominent
figures. For example, these Vajrayana people talk about Mahakali. She's the
daughter of Indra, although Indra expelled her because he wasn't happy with her.
Basically, the most powerful being within the desiring realm, which is where we
are, is Indra. And because Indra is very powerful, ordinary gods cannot look at
him directly. They can only look at the lapis lazuli floor. And because the floor
is blue and very clean, all the reflections of Indra the king of the gods and his
courtesans and his ministers are visible on the floor. And the ordinary gods can
only talk to him by looking at his reflection.
Because Indra is so
powerful, ordinary gods
cannot look at him
directly. They can only
talk to him by looking at
his reflection in the floor
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
217



295
དེ་ནས་སྐྱེས་པ་བུད་མེད་ཚོགས། །
ས་ཡི་སྟེང་ན་གནས་པ་རྣམས།
།
སྣང་བ་དེ་ནི་མཐོང་གྱུར་ཏེ། །
ངེད་ཀྱང་རིང་པོར་མི་ཐོགས་པར། །
Seeing these appearances, multitude of men and women living on the earth's surface
would exclaim:
Once the assembly of men and women who inhabit the surface of the earth saw this
appearance, each would say:
206
ལྷ་དབང་འདི་འདྲར་གྱུར་ཅིག་ཅེས། །
དེ་འདྲའི་སྨོན་ལམ་འདེབས་བྱེད་ཅིང་།
དེ་ཐོབ་དོན་དུ་དགེ་བ་ནི། །
ཡང་དག་བླངས་ཏེ་གནས་པར་གྱུར། །
"O! May we also, before long, become like this divine king." Having made such a
prayer, that it be realized, they would truly adopt virtue and persist.
“Before a long time passes, may / 100 become like this Lord of the Gods!" Prayers like
these they would utter and to achieve this feat would adopt genuine virtue and remain
within it.
When ordinary beings like
us see Indra's reflection,
，
We are strongly attracted
by the wealth and beauty
and we will diligently
follow the path to attain
that result
Indra's reflection, and the reflections of all his palaces and retinues, appears on
the lapis lazuli floor. And when this is observed by ordinary beings like us, like
human beings, we are strongly attracted to the wealth, beauty and greatness of
these beings. We'll automatically want to be like them and have the same things
as them, so we'll inquire about what to do in order to become like this. And
realising that some sort of virtuous deeds are necessary, we'll try to be diligent in
praying and accumulating this kind of virtuous action.
237
དེ་དག་དགེ་བའི་ལས་དེས་ནི། །
འདི་སྣང་ཙམ་ཞེས་དེ་ལྟ་བུར
།།
ཤེས་པ
ད་པ་མེད་ཀྱང་ས་སྟེང་ནས། །
འཕོས་ཏེ་ལྷ་རུ་སྐྱེ་བར་འགྱུར། །
Though they may not realize that these are just appearances, they would, nevertheless,
through virtue, be reborn as gods when they had departed from the surface of this Earth.
"This is just an appearance!" There would not be any such understanding. Still their
virtuous deeds would lead them to be rebom in a divine existence after they departed
from the surface of the earth.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
218



Ordinary beings don't
realise it is only Indra's
reflection, but they can
still achieve Indra's state
through their aspiration
and virtuous actions
Ordinary beings don't know that this is only Indra's reflection. They think it is
real. But through their own wish to become like him, and their gathering of the
necessary causes such as virtuous actions, they can actually achieve Indra's state.
299
སྣང་བ་དེ་ནི་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཡང་། ། 1
རྟོག་པ་མེད་ཅིང་གཡོ་བ་མེད། །
དེ་ལྟ་མོད་ཀྱི་ས་སྟེང་ན། །
དོན་ཆེན་གྱིས་ནི་ཉེ་བར་གནས། །
These appearances are absolutely unintentional and without shift. However, their
presence on Earth is accompanied by great benefit
These appearances are totally free from ideation and do not involve the slightest
movement at all. There is nothing of this kind and yet nevertheless they are
accompanied by great benefit on the earth.
Indra's reflection doesn't
have any thoughts or
intentions, but it can still
have a big effect on
people
And Indra's reflections don't have any thoughts. They are only reflections. They
don't have thoughts like "let us inspire ordinary human beings, and make them
wish they could become like us". They don't have any thoughts. They're just
there. But they have a big effect on people, even though they're just reflections
and don't have any wishes. They make people have all these wishes and
aspirations, and all this diligence.
Day 6
Introduction
The attraction to Indra's
wealth and glory is an
important part of the
example
Some beings are so stupid
that they're not even
attracted to that
We will continue with the example of Indra's reflection on the lapis lazuli floor.
Upon seeing the reflection of Lord Indra and his retinue on the lapis lazuli floor
some ordinary beings, although not all of them, will become strongly attracted to
that. In other words, they see something that they want to be part of and a place
where they would like to be. But they don't have any idea that it's just a
reflection. This attraction to Indra's wealth and glory is quite an important
aspect of the example, because there are other people who are so stupid that
they're not even attracted to that. Anyway, those who are attracted will inquire
about what to do in order to become like Indra. And when they understand that
it can be attained through accumulating virtuous thoughts and actions such as
generosity, not killing, not lying and so on, they will then engage in these actions
diligently and they will end up obtaining that kind of state. Meanwhile the
reflections don't know any of these things, and they don't have any intention or
motivation to make any of these people feel any attraction.
But the reflections have
no intention to make
people feel any attraction
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
219



299
དེ་བཞིན་དད་སོགས་དྲི་མེད་ཅན། །
དད་སོགས་ཡོན་ཏན་བསྒོམ་པ་ཡི། །
རང་སེམས་ལ་སྣང་རྫོགས་སངས་
སངས་རྒྱས། །
མཚན་དང་དཔེ་བྱད་ལྡན་པ་དང་། །
In a similar way, beings with faultless faith and so forth will, through practising these
qualities, see the perfect Buddha manifest in their mind -
Those endowed with unpolluted faith and so forth, having cultivated the qualities of
faith and so on, will see in their own minds the Buddha's appearance,
300
འཆག་པ་དང་ནི་བཞེངས་པ་དང་། །
བཞུགས་པ་དང་ནི་གཟིམས་པ་དང་། །
སྤྱོད་ལམ་སྣ་ཚོགས་མཛད་པ་ཅན། །
ཞི་བའི་ཆོས་ནི་གསུང་བ་དང་
།
།
Endowed with the marks and meaningful signs. They see in walking, standing, sitting,
sleeping; enacting all the various modes of conduct,
Which is perfect and has special signs and marks. They will see the Buddha while he is
walking, while he is standing, sitting or resting in sleep. They will see him in manifold
forms of conduct:
3011
མི་གསུང་མཉམ་པར་བཞག་གྱུར་པ། །
ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་རྣམ་པ་སྣ་ཚོགས་དག །
མཛད་པ་གཟི་མདངས་ཆེན་པོ་ཅན། །
སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་མཐོང་བར་འགྱུར།
།
Proclaiming the teaching of peace or, without speaking, remaining in meditation,
performing various sorts of miracle and being with magnificence and splendour full.
When explaining the teaching leading to peace, when silently resting in meditative
equipoise or when displaying various forms of miracles. Possessed of great splendour
and magnificence, (the Buddha) will be seen by all sentient beings.
Likewise, when we have
occasional wholesome
thoughts, these things are
like a lapis lazuli floor
Likewise, some of us may have occasional wholesome thoughts about attaining
virtuous qualities. And this kind of virtue doesn't have to be Buddhist. It could
be from anything, religious or non-religious, from believers in 'Heaven and Earth'
or even followers of Rudolf Steiner. Basically, any wholesome thoughts, like
devotion or aspiration towards something wholesome, something non-violent,
something helpful to society, anyway to something more than oneself. These
thoughts aren't necessarily from a doctrine. They're basically commonsense, for
example you don't punch other people because you know that it's painful when
someone punches you. These kinds of things are like a lapis lazuli floor.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity 220



Virtue or goodness is not
defined religiously, but as
the kind of act that
doesn't create pain
Having that view, contemplating it, and then deliberately putting effort into
refraining from punching people, and telling other people not to punch is like
having the lapis lazuli floor very well vacuumed, cleaned and polished. It's basic
goodness. And when we talk about goodness, we're not defining it religiously.
We're defining it as goodness because that kind of act does not create pain.
Now, on this kind of ground or floor, the Buddha-nature that is the true nature of
your mind will then be reflected as the 32 major marks, or for some as the 80
minor marks. Basically you will see someone who inspires you. That Buddha
would reflect on that lapis lazuli floor, that commonsense floor.
On this lapis lazuli floor,
your Buddha-nature will
be reflected as the
Buddha or a figure that
inspires you
What you see on the lapis
lazuli floor depends on
how clean the floor is
Buddha-nature can
appear as all kinds of
masters or gods such as
Krishna, Shiva or Jesus, or
as animals such as the
supreme animals
Of course, this depends on how clean the lapis lazuli is. If it's not that clean,
then there's still a reflection of the Buddha, but it might appear as a companion
who is a bit of a good influence, but who is totally a pain in the neck. And if the
lapis lazuli or commonsense is cleaner, then I'm sure the Buddha-nature can
appear in the form of all kinds of masters and gods such as Krishna or Shiva, and
I really think as Jesus Christ also. Or as Omar Khayyam or Rumi, although
whether it appears as others is yet to be analysed. Basically, it appears as
someone who gives you some kind of bliss. And it can even appear as animals,
such as some of the supreme animals like elephants and lions. I was told that
one should really look at creatures like tigers, lions and elephants, or at least
their photos, as they have a certain effect. Or perhaps dolphins, maybe that's
good! And for some, the lapis lazuli is quite clean, and they see Buddha
Shakyamuni, prince Siddhartha. And this is so good! And you'll perceive him
walking. He will appear like that to you. Walking barefoot. Or perhaps wearing
Gucci shoes! Standing up sometimes. Or sitting. Actually, we talking about
Shakyamuni here, and Gucci shoes are more like the Vajrayana, so let's not talk
about that here!
For those whose lapis
lazuli is quite clean, they
see Buddha Shakyamuni,
prince Siddhartha.
We may see many
different manifestations
of Buddha in many forms,
att very majestic, on our
lapis lazuli floor of
commonsense basic
goodness. Our own
Buddha-nature manifests
all of them
When we depict, paint, or make statues of Shakyamuni Buddha, we sometimes
represent him sitting, sometimes standing, and sometimes lying down, with
different mudras or gestures. He may be eating or sleeping, and sometimes he
appears to be teaching. And sometimes he appears not to be teaching. And all
these appearances are very majestic. Anyway, we see all of this on this lapis
lazuli floor of commonsense basic goodness. What you see is being manifested
by your own Buddha-nature, and that's how you will perceive the Buddha. This is
quite an important point.
302
དེ་མཐོང་ནས་ཀྱང་འདོད་ལྡན་པ། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཉིད་ཅེས་རབ་སྦྱོར་ཏེ། !
དེ་རྒྱུ་ཡང་དག་བླངས་ནས་ནི། །
འདོད་པའི་གོ་འཕང་ཐོབ་པར་བྱེད། 1
Having seen this and felt aspiration for such Buddhahood, they apply themselves to it
most excellently. Through properly adopting its causes, the desired state is reached.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
221



Once having seen this, they 100 will wish to fully join what is named "Buddhahood"
and adopting its causes in a genuine way they will attain the state they longed for.
Some of us are attracted
to these manifestations
and seek to become like
them, so we follow the
path and attain that state
Some of us are more enterprising, and upon seeing these things we get attracted
to them. The attraction is quite important. And you want to be one of them, not
knowing that it's actually your own reflection. So you ask around about what to
do in order to become like this. And upon hearing that you have to do the six
paramitas and stuff like that, you will actually do it. And then you will actually
attain that state.
303
སྣང་བ་དེ་ནི་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཡང་། །
རྟོག་མེད་གཡོག་མེད་པ་ཉིད། །
དེ་ལྟ་ན་ཡང་འཇིག་རྟེན་ན། །
དོན་ཆེན་པོས་ནི་ཉེ་བར་གནས། །
These appearances are completely concept-free and involve no shift. Though this be
so, they bring to the world tremendous benefit.
These appearances are totally free from ideation and do not involve the slightest
movement at all. There is nothing of this kind and yet nevertheless they are
accompanied by great benefit in the world.
But these reflections have
no intention
Meanwhile, these reflections that appear to be walking and teaching, to have an
ushnisha, to be prince Siddhartha, they have no intention. They aren't thinking,
"We need to nail this guy down!” They don't have that kind of intention.
304
འདི་ནི་རང་སེམས་སྣང་བ་ཞེས། །
སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོས་མི་ཤེས་མོད། །
དེ་ལྟ་ན་ཡང་གཟུགས་མཐོང་སྟེ། །
དེ་དག་ལ་ནི་དོན་ཡོད་འགྱུར། །
Ordinary beings are held not to understand that, “hese are one's own mind's
manifestations" yet to see such forms nevertheless bring them benefit.
“This is appearance of my own mind." Worldly beings do not have such insight. Yet,
their seeing of this visible kaya will become meaningful for these beings.
Although we don't know
that it is just our own
reflection, it will still do
the job
And also we won't know that it is our own reflection. But the reflection will still
do the job, it will make you want to have those kinds qualities.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
222



305
རིམ་གྱིས་དེ་མཐོང་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས། །
ཐེག་པ་འདི་ལ་གནས་པ་རྣམས། །
ནང་གི་དམ་པ་ཆོས་སྐུ་ནི། །
ཡེ་ཤེས་མིག་གིས་མཐོང་བར་འགྱུར། །
Progressively, through what is seen, established in the yana, they will see the inner true
dharmakaya through the eyes of jñana.
Relying on gradually beholding this form, all those who follow the Great) Vehicle will
see their genuine inner dharmakaya by means of the eye of primordial wisdom.
The reflection is far from
useless, as it makes us
engage in the path that
leads us to Buddhahood
So it's not as though that reflection is useless. It will make you engage in all
kinds of accumulations of merit and wisdom and eventually take you to the state
of the Buddha.
.
306
ཇི་ལྟར་ས་ཀུན་ཉམ་ངའི་གནས་གཞན་དང་བྲལ་དྲི་མེད་བཻ་ཌཱུརྨ།
གསལ་མཛེས་ནོར་བུའི་ཡོན་ཏན་དྲི་བྲལ་དཔལ་ལྡན་སྟེང་ནི་མཉམ་གྱུར་ཏེ། །
དག་ཕྱིར་དེར་ནི་ལྷ་དག་སྣ་ཚོགས་ལྷ་དབང་ལྷ་ཡི་གཟུགས་ཤར་སྟེ། །
རིམ་གྱིས་ས་ཡི་ཡོན་ཏན་བྲལ་ཕྱིར་དེ་ནི་སླར་ཡང་མི་སྣང་འགྱུར། །
If all the earth were rid of fearful places and became flawless lapis, lustrous and
beautiful with all that jewel's qualities – free from impurity, magnificent and of smooth,
even surface, then there would appear, on account of its purity, the various divine
abodes and the form of the king of gods. By such a ground's qualities' gradual
disappearance, these things would once again become non-apparent.
if the whole earth became rid of fearful places and turned into an even surface oi lapis
lazuli that was flawless, radiant and beautiful, having a gem's qualities and unstained
lustre, various divine abodes and the form of their Lord would shine forth within it
because of its purity. Then, as the earth gradually lost these properties, they would be
invisible again and appear no more.
The lapis lazuli floor is
very even and has all
kinds of qualities
When the floor is clean,
Indra's reflection appears,
but when it is dirty, its
qualities cease and there
is no more reflection
The example is explained in more detail. The lapis lazuli floor, which is very
even just like the palm of the hand, has all kinds of qualities. When it is clean
and polished, the reflection of Lord Indra will be reflected in it. But as soon as
it's not clean, the qualities of the lapis lazuli cease to exist, and there is no more
reflection.
307
དེ་དངོས་ཐོབ་ཕྱིར་བསྙེན་གནས་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ངེས་པར་སྦྱིན་སོགས་ལ་ཕྱོགས་པ། །
བུད་མེད་སྐྱེས་ཚོགས་སྨོན་པའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་མེ་ཏོག་ལ་སོགས་འཐོར་བ་ལྟར། །
དག་པ་བཻ་ཌཱུརྨ་འདྲའི་སེམས་ལ་སྣང་བའི་ཐུབ་དབང་ཐོབ་བྱའི་ཕྱིར། །
རབ་དགའི་སེམས་ལྡན་རྒྱལ་བའི་སྲས་རྣམས་དེ་བཞིན་སེམས་རབ་སྐྱེད་པར་བྱེད། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
223



In order to obtain such a state, many men and women would turn to the "precepts of
close observance" – true generosity and so on, scatter flowers and do other like deeds,
their mind full of aspiration. In a similar way, in order to become this "mighty victor
king" who had appeared in their mind, comparable to pure lapis-lazuli, the victors'
sons develop their "mind" perfectly, their spirit being filled with great joy.
Yet, for their real attainment the men and women would side with the vows of
individual release, with penitence, authentic giving and so forth, scattering flowers and
so on with longing minds. Likewise, to attain the state of a Lord of Munis shining forth
in their minds, which is similar to pure lapis lazuli, the heirs of the Victor, their vision
filled with sheer delight, give rise to bodhicitta in the most perfect manner.
Those of us who wish to
become like Indra will
engage in virtuous actions
such as generosity or
meditation
Some of us, those who wish to reach the state of Lord Indra, will try to engage in
all kinds of virtuous actions such as the lay disciplines of fasting and refraining
from at least one non-virtuous action. Or we will engage in generosity,
discipline, shamatha, and vipashyana meditation. Or we will at least have the
aspiration to become like that and then throw some flowers on the lapis lazuli as
an offering.
308
ཇི་ལྟར་བི་ཌུར་ས་གཞི་གཙང་མ་ལ། 1
ལྷ་དབང་ལུས་ཀྱི་གཟུགས་བརྙན་སྣང་བ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་འགྲོ་སེམས་ས་གཞི་གཙང་མ་ལ།
ཐུབ་པའི་དབང་པོའི་སྐུ་ཡི་
ཕྱི་གཟུགས་བརྙན་འཆར།
Just as the reflection of the form of the king of gods appears in the clear lapis-lazuli
ground, so also does the reflection of the king of mighty sages' form appear in the clear
ground that is beings' minds.
just as mirrored by the purified lapis lazuli ground the physical appearance of the Lord
of Gods is seen, likewise the kaya of the Lord of Munis is reflected in the purified ground
of sentient beings' mind.
309
འགྲོ་བར་གཟུགས་བརྙན་འཆར་ནུབ་རྙོག་མེད་དང་། །
རྙོག་པའི་རང་སེམས་རབ་འཇུག་དབང་གིས་འཇུག །
ཇི་ལྟར་འཇིག་རྟེན་དག་ན་གཟུགས་སྣང་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཡོད་དང་ཞིག་ཅེས་དེ་མི་ལྟ། །
For beings, the appearances and disappearances of these reflections occur because of
their mind's either unpolluted or polluted condition. Similar to the manifestation of
form in the worlds, these should not be taken as entities "existent" or "extinct".
Whether these reflections will rise or set in beings owes to their own minds being sullied
or unstained. Like the form of the Lord Indra) appearing in the worlds, they are not to
be viewed as "existent" or "extinct"
Likewise, Bodhisattvas will
engage in the path of the
paramitas to attain the
infinite qualities of the
Buddha
You should write stanzas 308 and 309 on the wall! Just like these boys and girls
who wish to become like Indra, Bodhisattvas who are on the path of the greater
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
224



vehicle will diligently engage in the path of the paramitas to attain the infinite
enlightened qualities of the Buddha.
For sentient beings with a
clean mind, the reflection
of the Sambhogakaya
Buddha appears to them,
like Indra appears on the
clean lapis lazuli floor
Just as Lord Indra's reflection reflects on a clean floor of lapis lazuli, the
sambhogakaya Buddha's reflection will reflect on the clean mind of sentient
beings. But when you forget to clean the lapis lazuli floor, then Lord Indra's
reflection either becomes distorted or even disappears for a long time. That's
not Lord Indra's fault, as Lord Indra doesn't even know. Forget about Lord Indra,
even the reflections don't know. They don't know if they are not there. Likewise
when sentient beings have a lot of defilements and obscurations, the reflection of
the Buddha appears not to be there. But it's not as if it is gone. This concludes
the first example.
For sentient beings with
defilements, the reflection
of the Buddha doesn't
appear. But it hasn't
gone
Example #2: The Heavenly Drum
310
ཇི་ལྟར་ལྷ་ནང་ལྷ་རྣམས་ཀྱི། །
སྔོན་གྱི་དཀར་པོའི་མཐུ་ཡིས་ནི། །
འབད་དང་གནས་དང་ཡིད་གཟུགས་དང་།
རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ་མེད་བཞིན་ཏུ། །
Through the power of the gods' former goodness, the Dharma drum in the divine
realms, without effort, location, mental form or concept,
By the powers of the gods' former virtue the Dharma drum farose) among them.
involving no effort, origin or thought, no vibration and no intention at all,
311
མི་རྟག་སྟགུ་བསྔལ་བདག་མེད་དང་། །
ཞི་བའི་སྒྲ་ཡིས་བག་མེད་པའི། ། i
ལྷ་རྣམས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཡང་དང་ཡང་། །
ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྫས་ནི་སྐུལ་བྱེད་ལྟར། །
Exhorts all the uncaring gods over and over again with its throbs of "impermanence",
"suffering", "no-self" and "peace".
The drum resounds again and again with "impermanence" and "suffering", "non-
existence of self" and "peace", admonishing all the careless gods.
#2: The heavenly drum
After the human realm,
the god realm has more
access to dharma than
any other realm
The second example is the big drum of the gods. As you know, among the five
or six realms, the human realm is supposedly the best. And the god realm is not
the best, basically, but I think that after the human realm, the god realm has
more access to the Dharma than any other realm. Well, for one thing the author
of this text is there! Anyway, many gods also have an aspiration to practice the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity 225



Dharma. And before Shakyamuni Buddha decided to descend to the earth, his
last samsaric life was in heaven. Many gods decided to migrate to human realm,
basically dying in the god realm and being reborn in the human realm.
The heavenly drum is like
an alarm that makes the
four sounds such as "all
compounded phenomena
are impermanenta
Although in the god realm the facility for the Dharma is not as great as in the
human realm, there is one big one - the big drum of heaven. It seems as though
it doesn't have a shape or anything like that, and it's supposedly up somewhere
in the sky. But from time to time it makes four sounds, "All compounded things
are impermanent" and all that. That's the example. Actually the drum in this
case is more like a siren or an alarm. And we don't have to think about the big
drum in the sky in a mythological way. That kind of alarm or siren exists even
here on earth in the human realm, for example every time someone dies it's the
drum beating, "all compounded things are impermanent". But a lot of us are
deaf.
When someone dies here
on earth, it's like the
drum beating, but many
of us are deaf
Because of their merit, the
gods have the drum to
remind them, and they
need it as their lives are
very insulated and death
is rare
Anyway, because of their collective virtuous deeds the gods have this big drum.
And they particularly require it, because death doesn't happen as frequently
there as it does here. For instance, this teaching is one of five teachings by
Maitreya and it was taught to Asanga in the god realm. I think Maitreya taught it
in five heavenly days, but when Asanga came back to earth, five years had
passed. The gods lead a very insulated life in their realm. Their insurance really
works! It's the real thing, not just the fake deception that we have. And they
also have a really good security system, so they keep defeating the asuras all the
time. So they need this drum to remind them.
312
དེ་བཞིན་ཁྱབ་བདག་འབད་སོགས་དང་། །
བྲལ་ཡང་འགྲོ་བ་མ་ལུས་པ། །
སངས་རྒྱས་གསུང་གིས་ཁྱབ་མཛད་དེ། 1
སྐལ་ལྡན་རྣམས་ལ་ཆོས་སྟོན་ཏོ། །
Like this, the all-pervading is without effort and so on, yet his Buddha-speech permeates
all beings without exception, teaching the noble doctrine to those of good fortune.
Likewise, though free from effort and so on, the Buddha speech of the All-pervading
Ones permeates sentient beings without exception, teaching Dharma to those of karmic
fortune
Just as the drum makes
the four sounds without
any intention, the Buddha
teaches without intention
Anyway, the drum doesn't have any intention or mouth, but the sound of these
four seals or four essences comes spontaneously. Likewise, Lord Chabda, the
Lord of All-Pervading, meaning the Buddha, also teaches without any intention or
any words, phrases or language.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
226



313
ཇི་ལྟར་ལྷ་ནང་ལྷ་རྣམས་ཀྱི། །
རྔ་སྒྲ་རང་གི་ལས་ལས་བྱུང་། །
དེ་བཞིན་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཐུབ་པའི་ཆོས། །
གསུང་བ་རང་གི་ལས་ལས་
འབད་ནས་ལུས་དང་སེམས་བྲལ་བའི།
སྒྲ་དེ་ཇི་ལྟར་ཞི་སྒྲུབ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་འབད་སོགས་དང་བྲལ་བའི། །
ཆོས་དེ་ཞི་བ་སྒྲུབ་པར་བྱེད། །
པ་བྱུང་། །
just as the divine drum's throb sounds for devas, through their karma, so also the sage's
Dharma speech arises in the world due to karma. Just as its sound, without effort,
source, form or mind, brings peace, so also, without effort and the others, is peace
procured by Dharma.
usi as the sound of the drum arises among the gods from their own deeds, the Dharma
spoken by the Muni arises in the world from beings'own deeds. just as the sound of
the drum accomplishes peace without effort, origin, visible form or intention, likewise
the Dharma causes accomplishment of peace without deliberate effort or any other
such feature
Just as the drum appears
because of the collective
good karma of the gods,
a Buddha appears and
teaches because of our
collective good karma
Once you understand the first example of the lapis lazuli floor, the rest of the
examples are very similar. How did the sound of the drum happen to be there?
Because of the collective good karma of the god realm. Likewise, because of our
collective good karma, a Buddha appears and teaches. This also happens a lot
on a human level. Many sentient beings nowadays don't have good karma, and
our collective karma is maybe not that good, so our singers, performers and
writers do things that are not especially wholesome or non-violent. But when the
collective karma is good, sometimes there are seemingly crazy artists who do
things that benefit a lot of people.
Past masters like Jigme
Lingpa and Gampopa
write about cuckoos, as
they remind practitioners
that time is passing and
another spring has come
For instance, when you read the songs of the past masters like Jigme Lingpa and
Gampopa, you will often find a reference to cuckoos. Cuckoos supposedly
migrate from India to Tibet in the springtime, and when practitioners in the
forest hear cuckoos it reminds them that time is passing and another spring has
come. Most of us don't have much chance to hear cuckoos these days, as we live
among too many buildings. Now I'll make up the example a little bit, based on
the true sources although they are mixed together. There is a story about
Kharak Gomchung in the Kunzang Lama' Shelung, 'The Words of My Perfect
Teacher'. Whenever he thinks of coming out from his cave he sees a small thorny
bush growing in front. Since clearing it would take time, and time is precious
because the light will fade, he goes back inside and continues practicing. And
one day the bush has grown so big that he can't go out. I'm imagining that his
urgency to go back and practice, and not waste too much time cutting this bush,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
227



Cuckoos can inspire and
benefit practitioners, even
if they are only cooing to
attract a mate!
could be because there's a cuckoo singing and reminding him that time is
passing. In this case, I would say that it's our collective good karma that this
cuckoo sang and inspired Kharak Gomchung to practice, so that his story can
inspire us now. That's how it works. I'm sure the cuckoo wasn't thinking about
us at all, but it doesn't matter, as it had the effect. For all we know the cuckoo
was cooing for a mate!
ཇི་ལྟར་ལྷ་ཡི་གྲོང་ན་རྔ་སྒྲའི་རྒྱུས་བྱུང་མི་འཇིགས་སྦྱིན་པ་ནི། །
ཉོན་མོངས་གཡུལ་དུ་འཇུག་ཚེ་ལྷ་མིན་དཔུང་རྒྱལ་རྩེད་མོ་སེལ་བ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་འཇིག་རྟེན་དག་ན་བསམ་གཏན་གཟུགས་མེད་ལ་སོགས་རྒྱུས་བྱུང་བ།
སེམས་ཅན་ཉོན་མོངས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་རབ་འཇོམས་ཞི་བ་བླ་མེད་ལམ་ཚུལ་བརྗོད།
1
The sound of the drum in the celestial citadel is the cause which both bestows
fearlessness, to vanquish Asura armies when through defilement wars occur, and ends
divine playfulness. Like this, that arising from the likes of formless meditation
proclaims, in the worlds, the way of unsurpassable path of peace, to totally defeat
sentient beings' defilements and suffering.
The sound of the drum in the city of the gods acts as the cause, yielding the gilt of
undauntedness and granting them victory over the host of the asuras, when these,
driven by their poisons, make war upon them and it dispels the gods' revelling in play.
Likewise, arising in the worlds from the cause of meditative stability, formless dimension
and so on, expresses the mode of the unsurpassable path, which will fully overcome all
affliction and suffering and thus lead all sentient beings to peace.
When the drum sounds, it
helps the gods in their
fight with the asuras
Likewise, the sound of the
Dharma dispels all the
sources of dispute of
samsara and nirvana
Now the benefit of the sound of the drum. When this drum makes a sound, it
really helps the gods in their fight with the Asuras. Every time it sounds, it
reminds them how things are impermanent, and how things coming from
clinging to the self lead to suffering. Basically this is an example for the
Buddha's speech, whereas the first one of Indra is more for the Buddha's
appearance, his body. Likewise when the sound of the Dharma, the sound of the
speech of the Buddha is heard, it has the ability to dispel all the sources of
dispute of samsara and nirvana. Now there is a detailed explanation to tell us
why the Buddha's speech is like the drum of the gods rather than the cymbals of
the gods.
315
གང་ཕྱིར་སྐྱེ་ཀུན་ཁྱབ་ཉིད་དང་། །
ཕན་བདེ་ཆོ་འཕྲུལ་གསུམ་ལྡན་པ། །
དེ་ཕྱིར་ཐུབ་དབྱངས་ལྷ་རྫས་ཀྱི། །
སིལ་སྙན་རྣམས་ལས་ཁྱད་པར་འཕགས།
1
Universal, joyously beneficial and having threefold miracles, the sages' melody is
superior to the celestial cymbals.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
228



Universal, oi benelit, bestowing bliss and endowed with threefold miracle, the Muni's
melody is hy far superior to the cymhals treasured by the gods.
The gods love music, but
the heavenly drum is
unlike an ordinary musical
instrument. Likewise,
Buddha's speech is not
ordinary. Every drop
reminds us of truth and
dismantles the net of
delusion
The gods are known for being big lovers of music, for example Saraswati, Indra
and Brahma. At times we see Lord Indra holding a thunderbolt, but at other
times we see him with a tamboura or something like that. But this music is
different from the drum, as the drum isn't really a musical instrument. It's more
like an alarm or a siren, a reminder. It reminds being of the truth of phenomena
so they do not get caught up in delusions. Likewise, Buddha's speech is not
ordinary. Every drop of his speech reminds us of the truth, and dismantles or
disorganises the net of delusion. This is now explained in more detail.
316
ལྷར་ནི་རྔ་ཡི་སྒྲ་ཆེན་པོ། ། 1
སར་གནས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་རྣར་མི་འགྲོ། །
སངས་རྒྱས་རྔ་སྒྲ་འཁོར་བ་ཡི། ། 1
ས་འོག་འཇིག་རྟེན་དག་ཏུ་འགྲོ། །
The mighty sound of the divine drum earthlings' ears cannot reach. Yet samsara's
subterraneans can hear the throb of Buddha-speech.
The mighty sound of the drum in the divine realms does not reach the ears of those
dwelling on earth, whereas the drumming sound of Buddha's speech even reaches the
subterranean worlds of samsara.
Although the heavenly
drum is used as an
example, the Buddha's
speech is greater, as it
can be heard everywhere
Only the gods can hear the sound of this big heavenly drum, and not ordinary
human beings. Although the Buddha's word is like the heavenly drum, it can be
heard everywhere, so it is not like an ordinary musical instrument. This stanza is
basically saying that even though the heavenly drum is used as an example,
actually the Buddha's speech is even greater than the example.
317
ལྷར་ནི་ལྷ་ཡི་སིལ་སྙན་བྱེ་བ་མང་།
འདོད་མེ་མངོན་པར་འཕེལ་བའི་དོན་དུ་སྒྲོག ། |
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་བདག་ཉིད་རྣམས་ཀྱི་དབྱངས་གཅིག་ཀྱང་། །
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མེ་རབ་ཞི་བའི་དོན་དུ་འཇུག །
in the heavens, tens of millions of celestial cymbals resound to reinforce desire's fires.
Yet those whose identity is compassion effect a single melody to extinguish sufferings
fires totally
Millions of divine cymbals resound among the gods to set the fire of lust ablaze and to
fan its flames. The single melody of Those of Compassionate being manifests to fully
quench all the fires of suffering.
Unlike the Buddha's
speech, ordinary musical
Instruments like the
cymbals of the gods only
cause more distraction
Musical instruments such as the cymbals of the god realm can be the cause for
all kinds of distractions. But the sounds of the Buddha, the speech or melody of
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
229



the Buddha is the only antidote to extinguish this fire of suffering in samsara.
318
ལྷར་ནི་མཛེས་ཤིང་ཡིད་འོང་སིལ་སྙན་སྒྲ། 1
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྒོད་པ་འཕེལ་བར་འགྱུར་བའི་རྒྱུ། །
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་བདག་ཉིད་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་གསུང་
། །
ཏིང་འཛིན་སེམས་གཏོད་བསམ་པ་
པ་སྐུལ་བྱེད་ཉིད། །
The beautiful and pleasant music of cymbals in the heavens creates and increase in
their mental agitation. The speech of the fathagatas, whose nature is compassion, turns
the mind towards samadhi and stimulates reflection.
The beautiful and bewitching sound of the cymbals causes among the gods increase of
their distraction, whereas the speech of the compassionate l'athagata exhorts just to
reflect and commits the mind to samadhi.
The gods' cymbals cause
distraction, but the
Buddha's speech does the
opposite. It causes you to
focus and find bliss
Ordinary musical instruments such as cymbals cause distractions. Basically a
distraction or a movement is not bliss. The speech or melody of the Buddha
does the opposite. Instead of making your mind move and distracting it, it
makes you focus and not move. And this unmoving is bliss. And the speech of
the Buddha extracts you from samsara.
319
མདོར་ན་མ་ལུས་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཁམས་སུ་ཡང་། ]
ལྷ་དང་ས་གནས་བདེ་བའི་རྒྱུ་གང་ཡིན། །
དེ་ནི་མ་ལུས་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཁྱབ་སྣང་བ།
1
དབྱངས་ཉིད་ལ་ནི་རབ་ཏུ་བརྟེན་པར་བརྗོད། །
In brief, it is said that the cause of happiness, for those in each and every universe, in
heaven or earth, depends entirely upon that very melody which in every world is
manifest all-pervasively.
Any cause of happiness for earthly beings and gods in whichever sphere of the world
without exception, briefly spoken, fully depends upon this melody that pervades all the
worlds, not forsaken one.
The three miracle powers
of the Buddha's speech:
1) His form appears in
countless realms
2) He
the
and dispositions of all
First of all the Buddha will appear. His form will appear in countless realms. And
then he will make sentient beings realise that he knows their motivations,
elements and aspirations, all of them. And then he will teach them with his
melody. These three are what we call the three miracle powers of the Buddha
(chomtrul sum), which are actually the aspect of Bu has' speech somebody
were to ask you "what is the Buddha's speech?" it's these three: (1) that his form
appears in countless realms. (2) That he will let sentient beings know that he
knows each and every individual's motivation, elements and all of that. And (3)
that he will teach according to that.
3) He teaches according
to that
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
230



But the Buddha does not
have motivation. His
manifestations in
different realms are only
reflections. Your mind is
doing this
But this does not mean that the Buddha has motivation. All his appearances in
different forms in different realms, all these exist only on the level of the
reflection. At the end of the day it's your mind that's doing this. But you still
don't have control, basically because you have chosen not to have control. You
have chosen to give up all your rights and all your abilities. In India, they pierce
the noses of cows and buffalos to attach reins. And once someone has the reins,
then the buffalos have no choice but to follow them. And we're a bit like that. In
Tibetan there's a saying, "Every day we willingly give our rein to things". It's our
choice, and yet we complain that we have no choice!
But even though our
minds do this, we don't
have control. We're like
buffalos in India. Every
day we willingly give our
rein to things
320
ཇི་ལྟར་རྣ་བ་དང་བྲལ་བས། 1
ཕྲ་མོའི་སྒྲ་ནི་མི་མྱོང་ཞིང་
། །
ཐམས་ཅད་ལྷ་ཡི་རྣ་བར་ཡང་
ཟླ་ལམ་དུ་ནི་མི་འགྲོ་བཞིན། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཆོས་ཕྲ་མཆོག་ཏུ་ནི།
ཞིབ་མོའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་ཡང་། །
ཉོན་མོངས་མེད་ཡིད་འགའ་ཞིག་གི །
རྣ་བའི་ལམ་དུ་འགྱུར་བ་ཡིན། །
just as those with no hearing cannot experience subtle sound and even with divine
hearing not all sounds can be heard, so also is the subtle Dharma, the domain of the
very finest jñana, to be heard by just those few whose mind is undefiled.
Without an intact sense of hearing one cannot experience subtle sound, and all its
manifold variations) do not even reach the ears of a god. Likewise, as the field of
experience of the very finest primordial wisdom, the subtle Dharma only reaches the ear
of someone whose mind is rid of poison.
Not everyone hears the
Buddha's speech, because
some are partially or fully
deaf. Shravakas and
Pratyekabuddhas don't
hear his speech properly
or completely, and other
beings hear nothing
So the question is this. If the Buddha's speech is spontaneous and ever-present,
why doesn't everybody hear it? It's because some people are completely deaf,
and others are semi-deaf. So even though the Buddha has come and taught, and
his teachings are still dwelling, some ordinary beings will not hear them. It's not
the fault of his speech. And some who are semi-deaf will hear them, but not
completely. So they end up hearing the path of the Shravakas and the
Pratyekabuddhas. And the courageous ones, those with big, courageous minds,
will hear it completely.
I'd like to emphasise that when we say that Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas don't
hear his speech properly or completely, we're not referring to Sri Lankan or Thai
Buddhists, because each path will have the three enlightenments (changchub
sum), and each of them will say the same thing.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
231



Example #3: The Cloud
321
ཇི་ལྟར་དབྱར་གྱི་དུས་ན་སྤྲིན། །
ལོ་ཏོག་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པའི་རྒྱུ།
ཆུ་ཡི་ཕུང་པོ་འབད་མེད་པར། །
ས་ལ་རྒྱུན་དུ་འབེབས་པ་ལྟར། །
The rainy season's clouds continually and effortlessly downpour vast amounts of water
onto the earth and are the cause for good and bountiful crops.
The monsoon clouds in summertime continuously and without any effort pour down
their vast masses of water, causing on earth the best possible crops.
322
དེ་བཞིན་ཐུགས་རྗེའི་སྤྲིན་ལས་ནི། །
རྒྱལ་བའི་དམ་ཆོས་ཆུ་ཡི་ཆར།
འགྲོ་བའི་དགེ་བའི་ལོ་ཏོག་རྒྱུ། །
རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ་མེད་པར་འབེབས། །
Likewise clouds of compassion, without any conceptualization, rain down the waters of
the victors' noble teaching and cause the harvests of virtue for sentient beings.
lust so, from the cloud of compassion the rain of the Victor's pure teaching pours down
its waters without ideation, causing a harvest of virtue for beings.
#3: The cloud
The Buddha's mind is like
a rain cloud from which
the rain of dharma falls to
ripen sentient beings,
manifesting according to
the container it falls into
The third example is the example for the Buddha's mind. The mind of the
Buddha is like rain clouds. The rain ripens sentient beings. It manifests
differently depending on the container into which it falls, and the conditions of
the container do not manipulate the rain itself. This will be explained. The
rainwater has the effect of pacifying, of cleaning and washing, and during the
summer monsoon season, so much rain comes and ripens so many different
kinds of fruit. Likewise, from the cloud of compassion, the rain of Dharma falls
onto sentient beings in order to ripen their potential, and it does so without any
concepts or motivations.
313
ཇི་ལྟར་འཇིག་རྟེན་དགེ་བའི་ལམ་འཇུག་ན།
རླུང་སྐྱེས་ཆུ་ཆར་སྤྲིན་གྱིས་འབེབས་པ་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་བརྩེ་རླུང་འགྲོ་དགེ་མངོན་འཕེལ་ཕྱིར། །
སངས་རྒྱས་སྤྲིན་ལས་དམ་ཆོས་ཆར་པ་འབེབས། །
Provided that the world is engaged in virtue's ways, the wind-borne clouds will cause a
fall of rain. Likewise compassion's wind causes Buddha-clouds to cascade their rain of
true teachings to increase virtue in beings.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
232



just as the wind-born clouds cause rain to fall when the worldly beings follow the path
of virtue, from the Buddha cloud called by compassion's wind, pure Dharma rains to
nurture the virtue of beings.
When samsaric beings are
inspired to engage in
virtuous actions, Buddha's
wind-like compassion
causes the rain to fall
from the clouds
In this samsara, whenever samsaric beings have even a very short-lived
inspiration to engage in virtuous actions, the compassion of the Buddha that is
like the wind will generate a rain cloud and produce rain.
32-
སྲིད་ལ་མཁྱེན་དང་བརྩེ་ཆེན་འགྱུར་བ་དང་། །
མི་འགྱུར་མི་གོས་ནམ་མཁའི་དཀྱིལ་གནས་པ། །
ཏིང་འཛིན་གཟུངས་ཆུ་དྲི་མེད་སྙིང་པོ་ཅན། །
ཐུབ་དབང་སྤྲིན་ནི་དགེ་བའི་ལེ་ཏོག
ལེ་ཏོག་རྒྱུ།
ཇི་ལྟར་བསིལ་དང་ཞིམ་དང་འཇམ་པ་དང་།
ཡང་བའི་ཆུ་ནི་སྤྲིན་དེ་ལས་ཐོན་པ། །
ས་ལ་བ་ཚྭ་ལ་སོགས་གནས་འབྲེལ་བས། །
ཤིན་ཏུ་མང་པོའི་རོར་ནི་འགྱུར་བ་བཞིན། །
In the world, due to great compassionate love and knowledge, the lord of all sage's
clouds abide amidst a space unblemished by either that which changes or the
changeless. They have, as their unspoilt essence, samadhi and dharani's waters, which
for the harvest of virtue there are the very cause.
Through great knowledge and compassionate love with regard to existence it abides in
the midst of space unsullied by change and non-change. Holding the essence of
unpolluted waters of dharani and samadhi, the cloud of the Lord of Munis is the cause
of the harvest of virtue.
The rain cloud has the
moisture of samadhi and
wisdom, but it has no
motivation. So neither
samsara nor nirvana can
manipulate its wisdom
and compassion
Let's explain this in more detail. Sentient beings are the harvest. Buddha is the
cloud. What kind of cloud? A cloud that has the moisture of samadhi and
wisdom. And where is this cloud? In the sky. What kind of sky? The sky of
omniscience and compassion. But neither samsara nor nirvana could ever
manipulate this compassion and wisdom, as the cloud doesn't have motivation.
It doesn't think things like “There's a drought, so I should produce more rain", or
"There's a flood, so I should stop raining".
325
དེ་བཞིན་འཕགས་པའི་ཡན་ལག་བརྒྱད་ཆུའི་ཆར། །
རབ་ཡངས་བརྩེ་སྤྲིན་སྙིང་པོ་ལས་ཐོན་པ། །
འགྲོ་བའི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་གནས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བ་ལས།
རྣམ་པ་མང་པོའི་རོ་དང་ལྡན་པར་འགྱུར། །
Cool, delicious, soft, light water fallen from the clouds acquires many tasted through
contact with salty and other grounds. Likewise the rain of the eightfold water of the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
233



sublime, falling from the heart of that vastest could of compassionate love, assumes
many a flavour according to beings' various states of mind.
Water that is cool, delicious, soft and lighi when it falls from the clouds acquires on
earth very many tastes by touching salty and other grounds. When the waters of the
noble eightfold (pathi rain from the heart of the vast cloud of love, they will also acquire
many kinds of tastes by the different grounds of beings' make-up.
If rain falls into containers
with different substances,
its taste will change.
Likewise, the rain-like
dharma will become
different for Shravakas,
Pratyekabuddhas, and
Bodhisattvas
The rain will appear differently to different beings. The rainwater is cool,
delicious, sweet, soft and light when it falls on the earth. But when it falls on
different containers that contain things like salt, chilli or sugar, then the taste of
this rainwater will change. Likewise, when the rain-like Dharma, teachings like
the sublime eight-fold noble path are showered down on beings, then they will
become different depending on the different vessels or faculties of the disciples
who receive them. It will bear different tastes for Shravakas, Pratyekabuddhas,
and Bodhisattvas. This is explained further.
326
ཐེག་པ་མཆོག་ལ་དང་བ་དང་། །
བར མ་དང་ནི་སྡང་བ་ཡི། །
ཕུང་པོ་གསུམ་ནི་མི་དག་དང་།
རྨ་བྱ་དང་ནི་ཡི་དྭགས་འདྲ། །
Those of appreciative faith, the middling and those with animosity form three groups
comparable to humans, peafowl and craving spirits.
Those of devotion towards the supreme vehicle, those who are neutral and those with
animosity are three groups for beings) who are similar to humans, peacocks and craving
spirits.
Beings may have liking,
indifference or animosity
towards the Mahayana
path, like the attitudes of
humans, birds and hungry
ghosts towards rain
Some sentient beings or vessels have an inspiration towards the Mahayana path.
Some other sentient beings or vessels have indifference, neither inspiration nor
revulsion. And there are some beings or vessels that dislike this rain of the
Mahayana path. Likewise, when the rain falls, there are three types of recipient,
Human beings like the rain. Perhaps "like" is not the right word. Basically, they
can use it. And there are birds for which the rain is not a big deal. And then
there are the hungry ghosts who dislike it.
327
དཔྱིད་མཐར་སྤྲིན་མེད་པ་ན་མི་དང་མཁའ་མི་རྒྱུ་བའི་བྱ་དག་དང་
། 1
དབྱར་ཚེ་ས་ལ་ཆར་བབས་པ་ན་ཡི་དྭགས་དག་ནི་སྡུག་པ་ལྟར། །
སྙིང་རྗེའི་སྤྲིན་ཚོགས་དག་གིས་ཆོས་ཆུ་བྱུང་དང་མ་བྱུང་བ་ལས་ཀྱང་། །
ཆོས་འདོད་པ་དང་ཆོས་ལ་སྡང་བའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་དག་ན་དཔེ་དེ་ཉིད། །
In the cloudless end of spring, it is men and these non-flying birds, and in the
summertime, when it rains, the craving spirits, who suffer. This example is made since,
depending on whether there is or not a rain of Dharma from compassion's multitudes of
clouds, then worldly beings will either aspire to or have animosity for Dharma.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
234



At the end of spring, when there are no clouds, human beings and the birds that rarely
fly fare unhappy or neutral, respectively). When rain is falling in summertime, the
craving spirits suffer. Similar to this example, the arising and non-arising of the Dharma-
rain from the host of clouds of compassion also {leads to opposite reactions in worldly
beings who long for Dharma or are hostile to it, respectively.
How the attitudes of
humans, birds and hungry
ghosts change in the dry
spring and rainy summer
For instance, when there is no rain at the end of spring then humans are not
happy. Birds couldn't care less. And hungry ghosts are very happy. During the
summer when the rain comes, humans are happy, birds again couldn't care less,
and hungry ghosts are unhappy because so much pus and blood and so many
hailstones are falling. By the way, I don't think this is talking about all birds.
There's a particular kind of bird called a tsataka that supposedly doesn't care
about rain. I guess others either like or dislike rain.
Likewise, when the rains
of the Mahayana come,
Bodhisattvas are happy,
some beings don't care,
and others are not happy
When the rain of the Mahayana path showers down, the Bodhisattvas are happy.
Some beings couldn't care less. And people who are very much attached to the
self and all that are not so happy. They're angry. When there is no rain of the
Mahayana path, Bodhisattvas are not happy, some sentient beings couldn't care
less, and others are happy.
328
ཐིགས་པ་རགས་འབེབས་རྡོ་ཚན་དང་ནི་རྡོ་རྗེའི་མེ་ནི་འབེབས་པ་ན། །
སྲོག་ཆགས་ཕྲ་དང་རི་སུལ་སོང་བ་དག་ལ་ཇི་ལྟར་སྤྲིན་ལྟོས་མེད། !
ཕྲ་དང་རྒྱུ་ཆེན་རིགས་པའི་ཚུལ་གྱིས་མཁྱེན་པ་དང་ནི་བརྩེ་བའི་སྤྲིན། ། !
ཉོན་མོ་ངས་དག་འགྱུར་བདག་ལྟའི་
གཉལ་རག་ལ་རྣམ་ཀུན་ལྟོས་པ་མེད། །
Deluging mighty raindrops, hurling down hailstones or thunderbolts, clouds do not
consider the small fauna or those run to the hills. Likewise the clouds of perfect
knowledge and compassionate love with their very fine or larger drops, do not mind
that some will purify their defilements and others tend to believe in a self.
When releasing a deluge of heavy drops or hurling down haitstones and thunderbolts, a
cloud does not heed any tiny beings or those who have sought shelter in the hills.
Likewise the cloud of knowledge and love does not heed whether its vast and subtle
drops will purity the afflictions or increasej dormant tendencies towards holding the
view of a self.
Buddha is not influenced
by whether or not the
vessels are happy. His
rain and hailstones will
come without prejudice
This stanza is saying that whether the vessels are happy or not will not influence
the mind of the Buddha. Sometimes the raindrops can be very hard, or the rain
clouds can hurl down hailstones and thunderbolts. But the rain cloud itself, like
the Buddha's compassion, travels everywhere without any prejudice. This is
quite important, because it is saying that Buddha's compassion will not give in to
sentient beings' wishes. It seems like a bit of a contradiction, as we also say that
the Buddha's compassion fulfils the wishes of sentient beings, but it's not.
Basically Buddha will not stop saying, "All compounded things are impermanent"
just because it's going to upset someone who is totally vain! So sometimes
Buddha's compassion
fulfils the wishes of
sentiert beings, but he
won't alter the truth to be
politically correct or give
in to beings' wishes
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche -- Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
235



Buddha's words can be like a thunderbolt. They won't necessarily be diplomatic
or politically correct. This is a very important aspect of Buddha's activity.
When Buddha taught the
Four Noble Truths, people
were either happy,
Indifferent or unhappy.
For example, Hindus who
believed in truly existing
caste were unhappy
We have already talked about how Buddha never teaches based on his
knowledge. He doesn't teach just because he knows something. He may also
choose not to teach, and that could very well be the teaching itself. For instance,
when Buddha gave the first sermon, the Four Noble Truths, those who were
inclined to cause and effect were very happy. And perhaps a busy cowherd
somewhere in Varanasi couldn't care less, as he was busy herding cows. And
some Hindus who believed in a truly existing caste system were very unhappy,
because cause and effect does not work with the caste system. Buddha said,
"You cannot be born as Brahmin, you have to make yourself a Brahmin".
Likewise, when Buddha
taught the second and
third turnings of the
wheel, some people were
unhappy. But this does
not manipulate Buddha's
teachings and activities
And when he taught Prajñaparamita at Vulture Peak Mountain, people like
Avalokiteshvara were very excited. Some others nearby couldn't care less about
what was happening there. And some theologians like the Charvakas may have
got quite upset. And when Buddha taught the third wheel of the Dharma at
different places, people like Vajrapani and Manjushri were very excited. And
some people like the past incarnations of the members of the Beijing Politburo
couldn't care less. And according to the Shentongpas, they would say that the
Rangtongpas were a little bit unhappy. But that will not manipulate Buddha's
teachings and activities. This is really quite an important quality of the Buddha's
activity. As much as he will benefit beings according to their wishes and
capacities, he will not give in to their defilements.
Although he benefits
beings according to their
wishes and capacities, he
does not give in to their
defilements
Day 7 -
Introduction
Every wants to have fun
and be happy, and
Buddhism isn't against
that! But happiness and
fun are very relative
Everyone wants to have fun. Everybody wants to be happy, and they look for
happiness, and there's nothing wrong with that. Buddhism does not contradict
that. It's not against that. But fun or happiness is very relative. One person's
happiness isn't necessarily happiness for others. George Bush's happiness is
obviously not happiness for Saddam Hussein. As Buddhists, when we pray "may
all sentient beings be happy", we will have a difficulty in catering to the
happiness of both Saddam Hussein and George Bush!
George Bush's happiness
isn't happiness for
Saddam Hussein
The meaning of happiness
also changes during our
lifetime, from sandcasties
to good careers and
finally to tablecloths
And even within our own single lifetime, the meaning of happiness also changes.
Once upon a time, happiness used to be sandcastles or toys. Then happiness
could have been computer games. Then happiness could be fast cars, and then
maybe a big house, or a good career and all that. And at the end, happiness is
tablecloths. Collecting tablecloths. This is because our interpretation of
happiness changes all the time. And based on our different kinds of
interpretations of happiness, our different views of happiness, we will value
things differently and approach them differently.
Based on our view of
happiness, we will value
and approach things
differently
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
236



In Buddhism, happiness is
freedom from clinging to
the self and phenomena
In Buddhism, we are also looking for happiness, but according to the Buddha
happiness is when you are free from clinging to the self and clinging to
phenomena. And that is what we call inexhaustible wealth, everlasting bliss, fun,
or whatever you want to call it.
329
འཁོར་བའི་སྐྱེ་འཆི་ཐོག་མ་མེད་དེར་འགྲོ་བའི་ལམ་ནི་རྣམ་པ་ལྔ།
མི་གཙང་བ་ལ་དྲི་ཞིམ་མེད་བཞིན་འགྲོ་ལྔ་དག་ན་བདེ་བ་མེད། །
དེ་ཡི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྟག་ཏུ་མེ་མཚོན་རྒྱུ་ཚུལ་སོགས་རེག་སྐྱེས་བཞིན། །
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་སྤྲིན་ལས་དམ་ཆོས་ཆར་ཆེན་དེ་རབ་ཞི་བྱེད་རབ་ཏུ་འབེབས། །
In this samsara of beginningless births and deaths, there are five sorts of sentient being.
just as there is no nice smell in excrement, among those five there is no contentment.
Their sufferings are like the unceasing pain of burns, wounds, chemical scalds and so
on. Compassion's clouds cause a mighty rain of true Dharma that will soothe all those.
in this cycle of beginningless birth and death five paths are open for sentient beings to
tread. Just as no sweet scent is found in excrement, no happiness will be found among
the five types of beings. Their suffering resembles the continuous pain arising from fire
and weapons or from a wound being touched by salt, and so on. The great rain of
sacred Dharma pours down in cascades from the cloud of compassion, fully soothing
and appeasing this fpain).
There is no lasting
happiness to be found
within these five realms
According to the Buddhadharma, wherever we dwell within these five realms,
there is always a fault. Just as you will not find any sweet scent in excrement or
anything dirty, you will not find happiness, at least not any everlasting soothing
inexhaustible happiness, within these five realms. Because if we could find such
a thing, then something that excited you in the past could excite you all the time,
but it doesn't seem to be that way.
There is endless pain,
anxiety and suffering, and
nothing is certain.
In these five realms, there is countless pain and anxiety. There is the suffering of
suffering, such as disasters, war and famine. Basically, there is suffering on top
of another suffering, and that's what we have. And even if we don't have that,
we are definitely subject to change because we are within these five realms.
Nothing is certain. It is quite important to contemplate this truth that nothing is
certain. It's so important. If we just take the Buddha's first voice that "all
compounded phenomena are impermanent", I think that alone contains the
whole path to enlightenment.
Just the first seal, "all
compounded phenomena
are impermanent" has the
whole path to
enlightenment
We only talk about
impermanence on an
intellectual level, as we
crave permanence and
certainty
But when we talk about impermanence, about how nothing is certain, we end up
talking on an intellectual level. We have a constant longing and make-believing
for permanence and certainty. The reason we have things like moisturiser cream,
vitamins, medicine and all of this is basically because secretly we somehow
believe in certainty. This is why I find existentialists very contradictory, because
if they really don't want to believe in anything, they really shouldn't believe in
certainty. Even our Dharma practice, when we pray and meditate, and especially
when we seek blessings, is actually generated from our longing for certainty.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity 237
Even our Dharma practice
is based on our longing
for certainty



Buddha cannot change his
first voice. The one thing
that's unchangeable is
that everything is
changeable
Dramatic change is quite
good, but non-dramatic
change is the problem, as
It makes you believe
things are certain even
while they are changing
But you cannot ask Buddha, "can you please change your first voice?" And even if
he did change it, that wouldn't change the reality. We should know that the one
thing that's unchangeable is that things are changeable, so contemplation on
uncertainty is very important. We never know. Maybe half of the people sitting
in this tent will be in a wheelchair next year or the year after, or maybe they will
have another being inside them. Or maybe they will be going through the
anxiety of being a contributor to a being inside another being! Or maybe they
will be experiencing happiness. Things can change so dramatically. And that's
good. Dramatic change is quite good. It's the non-dramatic change that's really
not good. The most cunning thing about non-dramatic change is that it gives
you hope. It makes you believe that things are certain, even while they are
changing! Non-dramatic change is like the perfect camouflage to make you
believe that things are permanent. But everything can change. Your compassion,
your devotion, your respect, all of this can change. This is the suffering of
change.
Beside the sufferings of
suffering and change, we
suffer because all
phenomena are not what
they appear to be
So there is the suffering of suffering, and the suffering of change, and on top of
that we have another suffering. Everything that we experience is not what it
appears to be, and that is the big one. Basically all phenomena are compounded.
They are all like a gathering. And if some of what you have gathered were not
transitory, that would be a blessing. But everything that you gather is actually
transitory. And if you gather all these transitory things and then try to make
something solid out of them, it's like gathering 500 bubbles and trying to build a
house out of them. Many of the bubbles have already burst, some are on the
verge on bursting, and even if they are not, they are all bound to burst sooner or
later. And yet we have this amazing diligence to build things out of bubbles! We
have built a lot of bubble houses, and that is suffering.
Trying to build something
from transitory gatherings
is like building houses out
of bubbles. They will all
burst sooner or later
You might look at me right now and think, as I myself think, that I'm someone
who's really fanatically anti-fanaticism, fanatically anti-extreme. But we don't
know. I have all the attributes, the complete qualities, to be a complete
extremist in ten years. I could be sending all my students to do all kinds of
things, and I will have an incredible logic to justify that, one that cannot be
defeated. And I think I would probably have more students! All it takes to
change everything is just one small condition, like a drop of pollen from a
passing bee. That could change my view, my action, everything.
All it takes to change
everything is just one
small condition
330
ལྷ་ལ་འཆི་འཕོ་མི་ལ་ཡོངས་ཚོལ་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཞེས་བྱར་རྟོགས་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
ཤེས་རབ་ལྡན་པ་ལྷ་མིའི་དབང་ཕྱུག་མཆོག་ལའང་མངོན་པར་འདོད་མེད་དེ། 1
ཤེས་རབ་དང་ནི་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་གསུང་
ང་རབ་དད་པའི་རྗེས་འབྲངས་ལ། །
འདི་ནི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་འདི་རྒྱུ་འདི་ནི་འགོག་ཅེས་ཤེས་པས་མཐོང་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
Those endowed with prajña have no longing for even the highest celestial or human
sovereignty, having understood that divine death and transmigration as well as humans'
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
238



constant searching, are "misery". They have also seen, through prajña and through
following with trust the talhagatas' excellent teachings: "this is suffering","this is its
cause" and "this is its cessation" through "understanding".
"{Even gods have the suffering of death and transmigration, and man suffers from
desperate strife!" Realizing this, those endowed with discriminative wisdom have no
desire for even the highest state) of a lord of humans or gods. There is wisdom (from
the past and they faithfully follow the sublime words of the Tathagata, so insight makes
them see: "This is suffering! This is its cause! And this is cessation of misery!"
Bodhisattvas have no wish
to become like gods or
humans. They want to
abandon the causes of
suffering, which are
karma and defilements
Those who have wisdom, the Bodhisattvas, don't have any wish to become like
Indra. They know that even Lord Indra is the subject of suffering such as death
or transformation. They are also not attracted to human state, because they
know there is lots of pain of collecting things and losing what you have and all
that. Bodhisattvas know that the cause of this pain is actually defilements and
karma. And they are inspired to stop these causes, conditions and karma. So
they engage in the means of practicing the path, and the way they do it is by
knowing that suffering is something to be understood. “Know the suffering".
This is really important. We don't say, "Abandon suffering". We say, "Abandon
the causes of suffering", but to do that, you first have to know suffering. You
shouldn't think, "We know suffering, that's kind of obvious". No! What we think
is pleasure, like sandcastles and tablecloths, is actually suffering.
We may think we know
suffering, but we don't.
What we think is pleasure,
like sandcastles, is
actually suffering
331
ནད་ནི་ཤེས་བྱ་ནད་ཀྱི་རྒྱུ་ནི་སྤང་བྱ་ལ། །
བདེ་གནས་ཐོབ་བྱ་སྨན་ནི་བསྟེན་པར་བྱ་བ་ལྟར། །
སྡུག་བསྔལ་རྒྱུ་དང་དེ་འགོག་པ་དང་དེ་བཞིན་ལམ།
ཤེས་བྱ་སྤང་བྱ་རིག་པར་བྱ་ཞིང་བསྟེན་པར་བྱ། །
Just as the disease need be diagnosed, its cause eliminated, a healthy state achieved
and the remedy implemented, so also suffering, its causes, its cessation and the path to
be known, removed, attained and undertaken.
in the case of disease, one needs to diagnose it, remove its cause, attain the happy state
of health and rely on suitable medicine; similarly one needs to recognize suffering,
removing its cause, come in touch with its cessation and rely on the suitable path.
It is important for the
Bodhisattva to know
suffering and its causes,
as he wishes to apply the
antidote
Knowing suffering is a very important subject, as the Bodhisattva wishes to be
free from the disease, which is suffering. And the antidote or medicine for the
disease is what the Bodhisattva is trying to apply.
Example #4: Brahma
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
239



332
ཇི་ལྟར་ཚངས་པ་ཚངས་བ་ཡི། །
གནས་ནས་འཕྲོ་བ་མེད་བཞིན་དུ། །
ལྷ་ཡི་གནས་ནི་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ།
སྣང་བ་འབད་མེད་སྟོན་པ་ལྟར། །
Without effort and without leaving the Brahma-heaven, Brahma in any divine abode
can manifest his presence.
Just like the way in which Brahma, without departing from his abode, effortlessly shows
his appearance in all the residences of the gods,
333
དེ་བཞིན་ཐུབ་པ་ཆོས་སྐུ་ལས། །
བསྐྱོད་པ་མེད་པར་ཁམས་ཀུན་ཏུ། །
སྐལ་ལྡན་རྣམས་ལ་འབད་མེད་པར། །
སྦྲུལ་པ་དག་ནི་སྟོན་པར་མཛད། །
Similarly, without ever departing from dharmakaya, the great victor effortlessly
manifests his emanations in any sphere, to the mature.
Without moving from dharmakaya the Muni effortlessly demonstrates illusory
appearances in every realm to beings who have karmic fortune.
#4: Brahma
just like Brahma manifests
without moving, the
Buddha manifests myriad
forms and emanations
without moving from the
dharmakaya
The fourth example is Brahma, and we start with a summary. We have already
talked about Indra, and now we talk about Brahma, who is an even higher god.
He is one of the three main figures in Hinduism. He is creator of the whole
world, because he's one of the most skilled magicians. He can do whatever he
likes. Because in his past lives he has done things of incredible virtue, especially
the practice of Brahmacarya, refraining from all kinds of unwholesome things.
Brahma is the creator, Vishnu is the sustainer, and Shiva is the destroyer. And
Brahma has four faces. I think he wanted to look at Saraswati, but Saraswati is a
very active young girl going around everywhere, so he just couldn't turn around
quickly enough, so he just manifested four faces. But the thing is that he never
moves from his seat, even though his manifestations are manifested in all kinds
of realms. Likewise, the Buddha manifests in myriad forms and emanations
without moving from the state of dharmakaya.
334
ཇི་ལྟར་ཚངས་རྟག་གཞལ་ཡས་ཁང་ན་མི་གཡོ་འདོད་ཁམས་ཞུགས་པ་དེ། །
ལྷ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་མཐོང་དེ་མཐོང་དེ་ཡང་ཡུལ་ལ་དགའ་བ་སྤོང་བྱེད་ལྟར། །
དེ་བཞིན་བདེ་གཤེགས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ལས་མི་བསྐྱོད་འཇིག་རྟེན་ཁམས་ཀུན་ཏུ། །
སྐལ་ལྡན་གྱིས་མཐོང་དེ་མཐོང་དེ་ཡང་རྟག་ཏུ་དྲི་མ་ཀུན་སེལ་བྱེད། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
240



Without leaving his palace, Brahma manifests in the sensuous realm. Seeing him there
makes its gods abandon seeking sense gratification. Similarly, the sugatas, while never
departing from dharmakaya, are seen in every world-sphere by those who are ready.
This vision is constantly causing them to relinquish impurity.
When Brahma, never departing from his palace, has manifested in the desire realm, he
is seen by the gods. This vision incites them to emulate him and to abandon their
delight in sensuous) objects. Similarly, without moving from dharmakaya, the Sugata is
seen in all spheres of this world by beings of karmic fortune. This vision incites them to
emulate him and to dispel all their pollution.
When Brahma manifests
in the god realm, the
gods wish to become like
him, and dedicate their
tives to attaining this
Without moving from his seat, Brahma manifests everywhere, and one of his
manifestations appears within the karmadhatu, the desire realm of the gods.
And when the gods see the form of Brahma, they realise the inadequacy and
incompleteness of their own godly wealth. They see that Brahma's is better. So
they renounce their attachment to their godly wealth, and have a strong wish to
be like Brahma. They dedicate all their life to this, and as a result they will be
reborn in his realm. Likewise, the Buddha, the dharmakaya, manifests in all
different realms while never moving from that state. The cause of this is
explained in the next stanza.
335
སྔོན་གྱི་རང་ཉིད་སྨོན་ལམ་དང་། །
ལྷ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ནི་དགེ་བའི་མཐུས། །
ཇི་ལྟར་ཚངས་པ་འབད་མེད་སྣང་
།
རང་བྱུང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་དེ་བཞིན་ནོ། །
Due to both the power of his own former prayers and the gods' virtue, Brahma appears
effortlessly; the Spontaneous One's emanated form appears similarly.
By his own former wishing prayers and the power of the virtue of the gods Brahma
appears without deliberate effort. So does the self-sprung illusory kaya.
There are two causes for
Brahma's manifestation:
(1) his own merit, and
(2) the merit of the gods
Likewise, the rupakayas
manifest because of:
(1) Buddha's aspirations
as a Bodhisattva, and
(2) sentient beings' merit
Why do the gods see Brahma's manifestation? What is the cause? There are two
causes. One is Brahma's own merit, such as his aspiration in his past lives,
through which he has obtained this powerful state of Brahma. And the second
cause is the merit of the gods, the power of their virtuous actions. So without
any effort they see the appearance of Brahma. Likewise the Buddha's
manifestations or rupakayas, the nirmanakaya and the sambhogakaya, can be
seen because of two causes. The first is the Buddha's own aspirations and his
activities while he was a Bodhisattva, and the second is sentient beings' good
karma and fortune, such as the power of their own aspirations.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
241



336
འཕོ་དང་ལྷུམས་འཇུག་བལྟམས་དང་ཡབ་ཀྱི་ཁབ་གཤེགས་དང་
། །
དགྱེས་རོལ་པ་དང་དབེན་པར་སྤྱོད་དང་བདུད་བཅོམ་དང་
། ། !
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཆེ་བརྙེས་ཞི་བའི་གྲོང་དུ་ལམ་སྟོན་དག །
བསྟན་ནས་ཐུབ་པ་སྐལ་མེད་མིག་གི་ལམ་མི་འགྱུར། །
Descent, entry into the womb, going lo his father's palace, enjoyment, solitary practise,
subduing negativity, attainment of enlightenment, teaching the path to the citadel of
peace - having demonstrated these, the mighty sage become invisible to those of
insufficient maturity.
He moves from [Tushita] and enters the womb, gets born and goes to his father's
palace. He enjoys amusement and then seeks solitude, undergoes austerity and defeats
all evils. {In Bodhgaya) he finds great enlightenment and shows the path to the citadel
of peace. The Muni, having shown these deeds), becomes invisible to those of no
karmic fortune.
A brief summary of how
the nirmanakaya appears
The nirmanakaya only
appears to those who
have merit
Descending from Tushita heaven, entering the womb of his mother Maya in the
form an elephant. Being born in Lumbini grove. Going to his father's palace.
Enjoying the queens. Renouncing all of that and practicing penance. Renouncing
that as well, and entering the path of the essence of enlightenment. Destroying
all the demons, the maras. Obtaining enlightenment. Teaching those who are
tameable how to reach nirvana. And finally passing into parinirvana. Those who
are not fortunate will not perceive any of this. Basically Maitreya is saying that
you have to have merit to observe all that.
Example #5: The Sun
337
ཇི་ལྟར་ཉི་མས་གདུངས་པའི་དུས་གཅིག་ཚེ་ཉིད་ལ། །
པད་སོགས་རྒྱས་དང་ཀུ་མུ་ཏ་ནི་རབ་ཟུམ་པ། །
ཆུ་སྐྱེས་ལྕེ་རང་ཐུམ་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་སྐྱོན་དག་ལ། །
ཉི་མ་རྟོག་མེད་འདིར་ནི་འཕགས་པའི་ཉི་དེ་བཞིན། །
When the sun blazes, lotuses and like flowers open; simultaneously, the kumuta flowers
close up completely. The sun has no thought of "good" or "bad" that those "water-
born" flowers be either open or closed. Like this also is the "sun" – the perfectly-
realized one.
When the sun blazes down, lotuses and so on open while simultaneously kumata
flowers totally close. On the benefit and fault of the water-born flowers' opening and
closing the sun does not shed any thought. The sun of the Noble acts likewise.
Now the fifth example. When the blazing sun appears in the sky, the lotus and
many other flowers will open. But at the same time, the kumuta flower will close
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
242



#5: The sun
When the sun shines,
flowers like the lotus will
open, some other flowers
are indifferent, but the
kumuta will close
completely. I think the kumuta is a very small white flower that blossoms at
night and has a sweet smell. Perhaps it's night jasmine? In India it's called
"Queen of the Night". Anyway, when the sun comes, the lotus and many other
flowers will open, and the kumuta will close. And there are some other flowers
that don't have any bias or preference like the lotus or jasmine, and don't have
any wish to either open or close.
333
ཇི་ལྟར་ཉི་མ་རྟོག་མེད་པར།
རང་འོད་ཅིག་ཅར་སྤྲོས་པ་ཡིས། །
པདྨ་རྒྱས་པར་བྱེད་པ་དང་།
གཞན་དག་སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་པ་ལྟར། །
The sun, without ideation, by its own light's radiation, simultaneously makes lotuses
and other things ripen.
As the sun shining its won light simultaneously and without thought makes lotus flowers
open their petals and brings ripening to other crops),
139
དེ་བཞིན་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ཡི། །
ཉི་མ་དམ་ཆོས་འོད་ཟེར་དག །
གདུལ་བྱའི་སྐྱེ་བོའི་པདྨ་ལ། །
རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ་མེད་པར་འཇུག །
Similarly, without ideation, the tathagata sun pours forth his rays of true Dharma onto
those "otuses" who are beings to be trained.
So the sun of the Tathagata manifests, shedding its rays of the sacred Dharma on the
lotus-like beings to be trained without harbouring any thought or idea.
Likewise, the Buddha will
radiate the Dharma like
sunshine without any
intention or prejudice
Likewise, the Buddha who is like the sun radiates the Dharma like sunshine. And
those who are fortunate, those who are to be tamed by the Buddha, will open like
a lotus and they will reap the benefit like the harvest. But other beings will be
provoked and irritated like the jasmine. Dharmakaya and the rupakayas are like
the sun and its rays. They radiate at all times and in all places. The purpose of
this example is to show that the Buddha does not have motivation, intention or
prejudice, as in "these are my disciples and these are not".
343
ཆོས་དང་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་དག་གིས། །
བྱང་ཆུབ་སྙིང་པོ་མཁར་ཤར་བའི། །
ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཉི་མ་འགྲོ་བར་ནི། །
ཡེ་ཤེས་འོད་ཟེར་སྤྲོ་བར་མཛད། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
243



Through the Dharma and form kayas, the sun of omniscience rises in the firmament of
the essence of enlightenment to send forth its sunbeams of jñana into sentient beings.
By the dharmakaya and the visible kayas the sun of omniscience rises in the sky, which
is the very heart of enlightenment, to shed light beams of wisdom on beings.
The dharmakaya and the
rupakayas are like the sun
and its rays, radiating at
all times without
prejudice
The dharmakaya and the rupakayas are like the sun and the rays of the sun,
radiating at all times without any prejudice. And the rays of the sun are infinite
and countless.
341
གང་ཕྱིར་གདུལ་བྱ་དག་པ་ཡི། །
ཆུ་ཡི་སྣོད་ནི་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ། །
བདེ་གཤེགས་ཉི་མའི་གཟུགས་བརྙན་ནི། །
དཔག་ཏུ་མེད་པ་ཅིག་ཅར་འཆར། 1
Due to this, the sugata-sun in countless reflections appears at once in all those "water-
vessels" that are the purer sentient beings to be trained.
in all disciples, as in water vessels, simultaneously the sun of the Sugata is mirrored in
countless reflections owing to the purity (of these beings).
But in containers that are
broken or filled with
muddy water, the sunlight
might not appear
But in some parts of the world, or in certain containers like those that are broken
or contain muddy water, the sunlight might not appear.
342
རྟག་ཏུ་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་ཁྱབ་པའི། །
ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ནམ་མཁའི་དཀྱིལ་དུ་ནི།
སངས་རྒྱས་ཉི་མ་གདུལ་བྱ་ཡི། །
རི་ལ་ཇི་ལྟར་འོས་པར་འབབ། 1
Continually, from amid the sky of all-pervading Dharmadhatu, in manner determined
by what they have merited, shines the Buddha-sun on the mountain-like students.
{From} within the space of Dharmadhatu, which continuously pervades everything, the
Buddha sun shines on the disciples (like) on mountains, as merited by each.
Although the dharmakaya
is seemingly far away, like
the sun is far from earth,
the rupakayas still reach
us like the rays of the sun
Although the sun is very far away from the earth, when the sun rises, its light
reaches the earth. Likewise, although the Buddha, the dharmakaya, is seemingly
very distant from this world, the Buddha's rays of compassion, the rupakayas still
reach this world.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
244



343
ཇི་ལྟར་རྒྱུ་ཆེན་འོད་ཟེར་སྟོང་ལྡན་ཉི་ཤར་འདི། ། 1
འཇིག་རྟེན་ཀུན་ཏུ་སྣང་བར་བྱས་ནས་རིམ་གྱིས་ནི། 1
མཆོག་དང་བར་མ་དམན་པའི་རི་ལ་འབབ་དེ་བཞིན། །
རྒྱལ་བའི་ཉི་མ་སེམས་ཅན་ཚོགས་ལ་རིམ་གྱིས་འབབ། །
just as the risen sun, with thousands of magnificent rays, having illumined the universe,
sheds its light in turn on the highest summits, the medium and the plains, likewise does
that sun, the victorious one, confer his light progressively on the multitudes of beings.
Just as the rising sun with thousands of far-reaching beams illuminates all the worlds and
then gradually sheds its fight on the highest mountains, then the medium-sized, and the
small, the Buddha sun gradually shines on the assembly of beings.
Just like the rising sun
first hits the mountain
peaks, the Buddha's rays
first hit Bodhisattvas, then
Pratyekabuddhas and
Shravakas and even
uncertain vessels
When the light from the rising sun reaches the earth, it first hits the highest
mountain peaks, then the medium peaks and finally the flat ground. And like the
sun, the rays from the Buddha first hit the Bodhisattvas, then Pratyekabuddhas,
and then the Shravakas. And then it also reaches the 'uncertain vessels'. It even
reaches those who are seemingly not vessels, the 'infidels' who might be
provoked or made angry by the Buddha's teachings. This might answer a lot of
the questions you asked yesterday. Patrul Rinpoche said "if you create a good
connection with a Buddha", which in Vajrayana they call a 'guru', "then you will
attain enlightenment within one lifetime". Maybe I shouldn't speak about this, as
it's Vajrayana stuff! Anyway, Patrul Rinpoche continues "but even if you only
have a bad connection with a Buddha, the end of samsara is guaranteed".
Even if you only have a
bad connection with a
Buddha, the end of
samsara is guaranteed
344
ཞིང་ཀུན་ནམ་མཁའི་མཐིལ་སྤྲོ་ཉི་མ་ལ་མེད་ལ། །
མི་ཤེས་མུན་
ད་བཀབ་ཤེས་བྱའི་དོན་སྟོན་པ་ཡང་མིན། ! 1
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་བདག་ཉིད་སྣ་ཚོགས་མདོག་བཀྱེའི་འོད་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས། !
གསལ་བ་དག་ནི་འགྲོ་ལ་ཤེས་བྱའི་དོན་སྟོན་མཛད། 1
1
The sun cannot radiate to the depths of space of every realm, nor show the knowable's
meaning to those obscured in dark ignorance. The one whose identity is compassion
shows beings the significance of the knowable-clarity, through spectra of radiant
multiple colour.
The sun does not radiate to the depth of space in every fields nor can it show the
meaning of the knowable to those) confined to the darkness of unknowing. Appearing
in clarity through a multitude of light emitting various colours, Those of Compassionate
Nature show the meaning of the knowable to beings.
As with the previous
examples, Buddha is
much greater than the
example of the sun
Now as before, Maitreya is saying that the Buddha is much greater than this
example. He's saying that the example of the sun is just used here for the sake
of communication, and it's not a particularly good example. This is because the
sun and the sunlight are not all pervasive. The sun doesn't have that kind of
power, as it sets at times, and even when it is there blazing with its full might, it
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
245



can only illuminate surface things and it does not illuminate the darkness of
ignorance. Buddha is much more than the sun. He illuminates the whole ten
directions simultaneously. His light never sets, and it illuminates the inner
darkness, the darkness of ignorance. When the Buddha's light comes to earth,
first it dispels the gross suffering and the gross causes of suffering, and leads
beings from the lower realms to the higher realms. And then eventually it will
even liberate sentient beings from the higher realms. And it dispels all the
causes of both gross and subtle sufferings.
345
སངས་རྒྱས་གྲོང་དུ་གཤེགས་ཚེ་མིག་དང་མི་ལྡན་པ་ཡི་སྐྱེ་བོ་རྣམས། །
མཐོང་ཞིང་དོན་མེད་ཚོགས་བྲལ་དོན་དེ་མཐོང་བ་ལས་ནི་མྱོང་བ་དང་
། ]
གཏི་མུག་གིས་ལྗོངས་སྲིད་པའི་མཚོར་ལྷུང་ལྟ་བའི་མུན་པས་བསྒྲིབས་པ་རྣམས། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཉི་མའི་འོད་ཀྱིས་བློ་སྣང་མ་མཐོང་བ་ཡི་གནས་མཐོང་འགྱུར། །
When the Buddha goes to cities, the eyeless see. They experience, through that seeing,
the meaningful, free from the various facets of the unbeneficial. Their intelligence
illuminated by the light of the Buddha-sun, those blinded by ignorance, fallen into the
ocean of existence and veiled by opinions' darkness, see the essence they had not seen.
When a Buddha goes to the city fof the disciples), people without eyes become sighted.
Being freed from all meaningless things they see the meaningful and experience
(happiness). When blinded by delusion they fall into existence's sea and are wrapped in
the darkness of view.5, the light of the Buddha sun illumines their vision and they see the
very point they never saw before.
When the Buddha walks in
the city, those who were
blind will begin to see
In the Mahayana, you are
considered blind when
you have a view
And it will illuminate or open the eyes of sentient beings and make them see
something that they have never seen before. When the Buddha walks in the city,
those who are blind will begin to see. Then they will stop doing unnecessary
things and become diligent in doing wholesome things. There is an important
point in this stanza. In Mahayana Buddhism, when we talk about 'blindness',
what makes you blind is when you have a view. I have really not been doing
justice to the powerful and poetic usage of words by Maitreya. And this phrase
"blinded by view" is an example.
This is why the Buddha
taught: first to remove
non-virtuous views, then
to remove views of self,
and finally to exhaust all
views
Basically, having a view is being blind. In Mahayana Buddhism, you have to
exhaust all views. That's why Buddha taught. First you try to get rid of non-
virtuous views and try to become familiar with virtuous views. And then you try
to get rid of clinging to the self or "me", by getting rid of the views of self. Last,
and most importantly, all views have to be exhausted. Every time that His
Holiness the Dalai Lama teaches, before he starts he recites this prayer "to the
one who eliminated all views, Gautama, I prostrate". So having a view is actually
being blind. And when the sun-like Buddha walks in this city of samsara, his
light eliminates all views, and eliminates the blindness of the people, and then
they begin to see with an eye that sees beyond views.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
246



Example #6: The Wishfulfilling Jewel
346
ཇི་ལྟར་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ་ནི། །
རྟོག་པ་མེད་ཀྱང་ཅིག་ཅར་དུ། །
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་གནས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ནི། །
བསམ་ཀུན་སོ་སོར་རྫོགས་བྱེད་ལྟར། །
A wishfulfilling gem, though thought-free, fulfils simultaneously all the wishes of those
within its sphere of activity.
A wishfulfilling gem, though free from thought, grants all those who dwell in its field of
activity each of their desires simultaneously, doing so in the most perfect manner.
347
དེ་བཞིན་ས
ན་སངས་རྒྱས་ཡིད་བཞིན་ལ། །
བརྟེན་ནས་བསམ་པ་ཐ་དད་རྣམས།
སྣ་ཚོགས་ཆོས་ནི་ཐོས་གྱུར་ཀྱང་
།
དེ་ནི་དེ་ལ་རྣམ་མི་རྟོག །
Likewise, though those of varying aspiration hear various teachings when relying on the
wishfulfilling Buddha, he does not so conceive.
Likewise beings of different ways thinking, when they rely on the wishfulfilling Buddha,
will hear various kinds of teachings, though he generates no ideas of these.
34g
ཇི་ལྟར་ནོར་བུ་རིན་ཆེན་རྟོག་མེད་འདོད་པའི་ནོར། །
འབད་པ་མེད་པར་གཉ
ད་པར་གཞན་པ་དག་ལ་རབ་སྟེར་ལྟར།
དེ་བཞིན་ཐུབ་པ་འབད་མེད་ཇི་ལྟར་འོས་པར་ནི། །
གཞན་གྱི་དོན་དུ་སྲིད་པ་ཇི་སྲིད་རྟག་ཏུ་བཞུགས།
Such a precious gem bestows on others desired wealth, perfectly, effortlessly and
without any concept. Similarly, effortlessly and however appropriate, the mighty sage
remains constantly in the world to help others for as long as it persists.
As a precious gem, which is free from thought, fully bestows the desired riches on
others, doing so without any effort, the Muni always stays for others' sake, as meriled by
each and as long as existence last, doing so without any effort.
#6: Wishfulfilling Jewel
The sixth example is the wishfulfilling jewel, which is the example for the aim of
his mind. I don't know how to explain the wishfulfilling jewel to you. I'm sure in
your mythology or history there must be certain treasures that many kings have
desired and fought for. Likewise, in ancient times in India, the idea of the
wishfulfilling jewel appears almost everywhere, in many different texts and
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
247



stories. There are similar stories in South-East Asia about white elephants.
There were many disputes between Burma and Thailand over white elephants, as
they were considered a royal symbol, and whichever kingdom possessed the
white elephant would have power and conquest and all that.
There are many stories
about the wishfulfilling
jewel, including detailed
descriptions of how lords
and merchants would
search for it
The wishfulfilling jewel is not like going to a treasure island, where you go and
collect gold and treasures. It's a specific jewel that you're supposed to tie to a
banner, and wash during the full moon with some kind of ritual, and then
whatever you wish for will happen. There are detailed descriptions about
powerful lords and merchants who constructed boats and ships and hunted for
this jewel. The stories are very detailed, for example they would bring crows to
navigate when they were in the middle of the ocean. They would release a crow
and let it fly away. And if the crow was able to land somewhere then that meant
the island was nearby. Or sometimes the crow might land on some sea monster
by mistake, but this was also good for the merchants because that's a warning of
danger. If the crows didn't find either island or danger, then once they became
tired they would have to return to the ship. We can read things like that with so
many details in Pema Katang and texts like that. Actually Indrabhuti was also
hunting for the wishfulfilling jewel when he ended up finding Guru Rinpoche!
Indrabhuti was searching
for the wishfulfilling jewel
when he found Guru
Rinpoche
There are three reasons
why Buddha is like a
wishfulfilling jewel:
(1) He has no intention
(2) He benefits beings
effortlessly
(3) He is rare
There are three reasons why the Buddha is like a wishfulfilling gem. First, the
wishfulfilling gem doesn't have any intention or conception of benefiting, yet for
those who are close by, their wishes get fulfilled. Likewise, Buddha doesn't have
any intention or conception, but he can fulfil the wishes of different beings with a
wealth of different vehicles. Second, when the jewel fulfils beings' wishes, it
does so effortlessly. Likewise, when the Buddha fulfils the wishes of sentient
beings, it's not as if he has to make notes in order to teach, or that he has to
learn the language of the audience and all of that. Third, the wishfulfilling jewel
is rare, which is explained in the next stanza.
349
གང་ཕྱིར་རྒྱུ་མཚོ་ས་འོག་གནས་དེ་ལ་འདོད་པས། ། ]
ཇི་ལྟར་ནོར་བུ་བཟང་པོ་འགྲོ་འདིར་རབ་རྙེད་དཀའ། །
དེ་བཞིནའགྲོ་བ་ཤིནཏུསྐལ་ངན་ཉོན་མོངས་ཟིན། །
ཡིད་འདིར་བདེ་གཤེགས་མཐོང་བ་རྙེད་དཀར་ཤེས་པར་བྱ། །
just as it is difficult for beings here desirous of such a gem to encounter one, because
they lie underground or in the ocean, so also should one know it to be difficult to see a
sugata, for those beings here, poorly fated and in defilements' grasp.
The good jewel lying underground or in the ocean is very hard to find for beings
wanting it. Likewise, one should understand that beings held in the grip of the poisons
and whose karmic gifts are poor, will hardly see the Sugata in their minds.
Even though it fulfils the wishes of people, the wishfulfilling jewel is very difficult
to find. It's very rare. It can only be obtained with great difficulty. Likewise,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
248



Although Buddha is
everywhere, it is difficult
and rare for beings to
perceive him because of
their defilements and
obscurations
even though the Buddha is everywhere, for sentient beings who don't have good
fortune, it is very difficult and rare for them to perceive the appearance of the
Buddha. This is because they are blinded by view, defilements and cognitive
obscurations.
Day 8
Introduction
We should tune our
motivation while receiving
these teachings, as it will
determine everything we
do
As usual it's really important for us to tune our motivation while we receive these
teachings and teach these texts. And all our actions, especially our virtuous
actions, must begin with, dwell in and conclude with the method of the three
wholesomenesses. And it's really important that our main aim or agenda should
actually be to obtain liberation, enlightenment. Especially for practitioners like
us, that will determine everything we do.
Ordinary practitioners like
us should begin with
renunciation mind. Even
this is difficult, as there
are too many attractive
things in this world, so we
aren't attracted to
enlightenment
For ordinary practitioners like us, we begin with renunciation mind. Even
renunciation mind alone is really difficult, as there are too many attractive things
in this world. But if you can see even more attractive things in enlightenment,
then renunciation becomes easy. However if all our emotions, clinging and
fixation are intact, then it's difficult for us to get attracted to enlightenment. It's
almost unheard of. Will we still have our pets after we are enlightened? Will we
still have the pleasure of choosing the right pet food for them? Will we still be
able to watch soap operas, something to look forward to next Thursday? Since
we will be omniscient when we are enlightened, maybe that just won't be
possible.
You are only a Dharma
practitioner if your main
agenda is enlightenment
For example, this applies
how you look for a
spiritual teacher
Seeking enlightenment, that being your main agenda, will determine whether you
are a Dharma practitioner or not. For example, one of the biggest dilemmas on
the spiritual path is finding a teacher. But most of the time, seeking
enlightenment is never your agenda when you are looking for a teacher. You are
basically looking for a higher-class companion. And that's difficult. Looking for
a guru is even more difficult than a middle-aged person looking for a partner.
When they become middle-aged, some people have the fortune of expanding
their repertoire, so they're less fussy about whom they hang around with.
They're not so particular, although that's only true for some fortunate middle-
aged people, and then only by force. They're being forced to be less particular.
But when you do the same thing with a spiritual master, it becomes kind of sad.
It might work on the relationship level, but when you are looking for a spiritual
guide and your strength to be really particular becomes somehow lethargic, then
it could cause a lot of sadness.
If your main aim is
enlightenment, you won't
be worried about approval
from your master or good
or bad signs on the path
While you practice, while you meditate, study and follow the Buddhist or
Mahayana path or whatever, if your main aim is enlightenment, then the path
becomes much easier. Then you're not longing for some kind of sign or approval
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
249



from your master, as that's not your agenda. That's not an issue. And until you
achieve enlightenment, there will be all kinds of good signs and bad signs, and
the good signs are worse that the bad signs. But you will not be tempted when
they come, because you are looking for enlightenment and not for signs.
We should generate joy
and enthusiasm for the
result of enlightenment,
so we should contemplate
the qualities and aspects
of enlightenment
Because enlightenment is our main aim, it's really important for us to generate
joy and enthusiasm for the result, enlightenment. To do that, it's really
important for beings like us to hear and contemplate the qualities, characteristics
and aspects of enlightenment again and again. And what better text can you find
than this one to hear about the qualities of enlightenment? But you have to keep
in mind that in Mahayana Buddhism, ground, path and result are the three
important things. The ground is the view. You follow the path in order to
actualise that view, and the result is the effect of actualising the view. And in
Mahayana Buddhism, the ground is beyond extremes or fabrications, the path is
beyond characteristics, and the result is beyond expectations.
In Mahayana, ground is
beyond extremes, path is
beyond characteristics,
and result is beyond
expectations
Example #7: The Echo
350
ཇི་ལྟར་སྒྲ་བརྙན་གྱི་ནི་སྒྲ། །
གཞན་གྱི་རྣམ་རིག་ལས་བྱུང་བ། །
རྣམ་རྟོག་མེད་ཅིང་བཟོ་མེད་ལ། །
ཕྱི་དང་ནང་ན་མི་གནས་ལྟར། །
The echo's sound arises due to others' faculties of cognition. Concept-free, it is
effortless and abides neither without nor within.
just as the sound of an echo arises due to the perception of others, without thought or
purposeful labour and neither abiding without or within,
351
དེ་བཞིན་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་གསུང་
། །
གཞན་གྱི་རྣམ་རིག་ལས་བྱུང་བ། །
རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་མེད་བཟོ་མེད་ཅིང་། །
ཕྱི་དང་ནང་ན་གནས་མ་ཡིན། །
Likewise, tathagatas' speech arises due to others' cognitive faculties and is concept-free,
effortless and abides neither without nor within.
So the speech of the Tathagata arises due to the perception of others, without thought
or purposeful labour and neither abiding without or within.
#7: The echo
This is another example for Buddha's speech. The example is music, or sound or
an echo. Probably the echo is best. An echo has no conception. It doesn't exert
Like an echo, Buddha's
speech has no conception
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
250



A person's own Buddha
speech is reflected back
at them, and they hear it a
a teaching. In Mahayana,
everything is manifested
by your own mind,
including anything good
or bad that you hear
any effort to tell us something. When someone shouts into a cave or something,
the cave shouts back. Likewise, Buddha's speech has no conception or effort.
But when fortunate beings have the karma to be able to listen, their own Buddha
speech reflects back towards them, and they hear it as a teaching. As you know,
although we are talking about the Buddha right now, in Mahayana Buddhism
everything is your mind. So when you hear somebody telling you something bad
or good or whatever, it's your mind that's doing the hearing. It's your mind
that's manifesting somebody telling you something or other.
Example #8: The Sky/Space
352
ཅུང་ཟད་མེད་ཅིང་སྣང་བ་མེད
།།
དམིགས་པ་མེད་ཅིང་རྟེན་མེད་ལ། 1
མིག་གི་ལམ་ལས་རབ་འདས་པ། 1
གཟུགས་མེད་བསྟན་དུ་མེད་པ་ཡི། །
Even though space is nothing whatsoever, non-manifest, not a mental object, without
foundation, completely invisible, without form and not demonstrable,
Space is nothing at all and does not appear. It is neither an object of the senses) nor a
support. It is totally beyond being a path for the eye. It has no form and is not to be
demonstrated.
353
མཁའ་ལ་ཇི་ལྟར་མཐོ་དང་དམའ། 1
མཐོང་ཡང་དེ་ནི་དེ་ལྟར་མིན། །
དེ་བཞིན་ཐམས་ཅད་སངས་རྒྱས་ལ། །
མཐོང་ཡང་དེ་ནི་དེ་ལྟར་མིན། །
it is "seen" as being "up" or "down" - but space is not like that. Likewise everything
seen relating to Buddha is not like him at all.
Nevertheless it is seen as being high and low, but it is not at all like that. Likewise all
This appearances are seen as Buddha, but he is not at all like that.
#8: The sky/space
Even though the sky is
unperceivable, we talk
about how it appears, and
whether it is high or low
This is the eighth example. By the way, I thought after all these examples the
text would be finished, but I'm wrong. I was surprised to find there's another
whole chapter! It has been almost 23 years since I last received a teaching on the
Uttaratantra. These two stanzas are an example for the Buddha's body. The sky
does not have a single entity that is tangible or perceivable. But in the ordinary
world we can say, "look at the sky", and we can look at the sky even though there
really is nothing called sky. And we can also talk about the higher sky, deeper
sky, clearer sky, lower sky, and so on. Likewise even though it cannot be
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
251



Likewise, beings see
Buddhas in many forms
but he is not like any of
them
perceived, Buddha's form appears for different beings on different levels. And
although beings will see Buddhas in different forms, Buddha himself is no
different.
Example #9: The Earth
354
ཇི་ལྟར་ས་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ་ཀུན། །
རྟོག་མེད་
དུ་ས་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་ནི། །
འཕེལ་དང་བརྟེན་དང་ཡངས་འགྱུར་ལྟར
།།
Everything which grows from the ground develops, becomes firm, and grows up
through depending on the thought-free earth.
Everything that grows from the earth will increase and become firm and vast on the
support of its thought-free soil.
355
དེ་བཞིན་རྫོགས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས་ས།
རྣམ་རྟོག་མེད་པ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས།
འགྲོ་བའི་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་རྣམས། །
མ་ལུས་པར་ནི་འཕེལ་བར་འགྱུར། །
Likewise every rool of beings' virtue, without exception, increases through dependence
on the thought-free Buddha-ground.
Likewise, relying on the Perfect Buddha, who like the earth is free from thought, every
root of virtue of sentient beings without exception will flourish and grow.
#9: The earth
Buddha's mind is like the
earth. The earth supports
all kinds of plants without
having any intention, and
likewise the Buddha
supports the growth of
virtue among beings
Buddha's mind is like the ground or the earth. The ground doesn't have any
motivation to give birth to all kinds of grass and trees, yet things sprout from the
ground, and become shoots, trees, leaves, fruits and so on. Likewise, without
any conception or intention of giving birth to or generating all the virtuous
thoughts and actions, Buddha manifests not only within the three vehicles, but
also among the tirthikas and the barbarians. And he makes them generate
wholesome and virtuous thoughts and actions.
356
འབད་རྩོལ་མེད་པར་བྱ་བ་འགའ
།།
བྱེད་པ་མཐོང་མེད་དེ་བས་ན། །
གདུལ་བྱའི་ཐེ་ཚོམ་གཅོད་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
དཔེ་རྣམས་དགུ་ནི་བསྟན་པ་ཡིན། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
252



Since ordinary beings do not perceive action without effort, these nine examples are
taught to annihilate students' doubts.
It is not obvious that one could act without exerting deliberate effort. Therefore nine
examples are taught to cut the doubts of the disciples.
One of the big problems
for dzogchen
practitioners is that they
misunderstand the
meaning of effortlessness
The next stanza is the reason why we use the nine examples. There's something
that I just have to say here, even though it's maybe not really the time to talk
about this. For people who listen to dzogchen teachings, one of their greatest
difficulties is that they just don't believe in the concept of 'effortless'. For
example, HH Dudjom Rinpoche's "Calling The Guru" is basically promoting
effortlessness and spontaneity. In fact, the whole dzogchen teaching is very
difficult to understand, and the main reason is that we are so used to the logic
that you have to earn things, that you have to work for them. We're so stuck with
that kind of logic. We believe that if you make the effort then you'll get the
result. But many of these so-called dzogchen practitioners completely
misunderstand the meaning of 'effortlessness' and they engage with a lot of
effort in being lazy.
We all want to do
whatever we feel like
doing, but that's so
difficult! We need to be
very brave, especially in
this world of advertising
and our concern about
what people will say. It's
much easier to follow a
code of conduct
Everyone wants to become like Drukpa Kunley, the "divine madman of Tibet". We
are a species that really wants to do whatever we feel like doing. And that's not
discouraged, especially in Vajrayana and dzogpachenpo. In fact they really want
you to do that. But that's so difficult! To do whatever you want to do is the most
difficult thing! You have to be so brave, so very brave! It's much easier to shave
your head, walk gently, and follow a certain code of conduct - much easier! And
we should have the aspiration to be able to do whatever comes in our minds,
without second thoughts or blinking our eyes. Without having any concerns
about what people will say. That's difficult in this world that is driven by
advertisement. Our generation is the generation of advertisement, and we just
don't know how to do what we want.
Some people pretend they
don't care about success
or failure, but they end up
stepping on people's toes
and burning people's
noses. And yet they call
themselves practitioners
of crazy wisdom
Someone who really can do what they want has no concept of so-called success
or failure. And on top of that, as HH Dudjom Rinpoche says, they don't burn
people's noses. What does this mean? You know, there are some people who
pretend that they don't care about success or failure, but then they do all kinds
of things so that wherever they go, they carry a certain smell or energy. And they
manage to step on people's toes. It's amazing! If there were an award for being
able to burn people's noses and step on people's toes, they should win it. And
yet they call themselves practitioners of crazy wisdom. There is just so much
pretence among Dharma practitioners. For example, the pretence of practicing
crazy wisdom, the pretence of being humble, or the pretence of being serene.
There's so much of that, just pretence after pretence, although they are all
different. Some come in the form of humility, and others come in the form of
confidence, but they are basically all pretence.
There is so much
pretence among Dharma
practitioners, whether it's
in the form of humility or
confidence
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
253



We are stuck with the
logic of expending effort
to reap a reward, so we
cannot conceive of how
Buddha benefits beings
effortlessly. This is why
the nine examples are
taught
So we are stuck with this logic of effort, or having to reap the harvest with effort.
And now we are being told that Buddha effortlessly benefits sentient beings all
the time. It's very difficult for us to conceive of this. This is why the nine
examples are given, because all nine examples have no intention or agenda.
They are just there and yet they benefit, like Indra's reflection. It doesn't have
any intention to help you, and it doesn't know what's happening, so to speak.
Yet by throwing flowers there you will actually reach that kind of state.
357
གང་དུ་དཔེ་དགུ་པོ་འདི་དག །
རྒྱས་པར་རབ་ཏུ་བསྟན་གྱུར་པ། །
མདོ་སྡེ་ཡི་ནི་མིང་ཉིད་ཀྱིས། །
དེ་ཡི་དགོས་པ་བསྟན་པ་ཉིད། ། !
These nine examples have been excellently, fully taught in a sutra of name that explains
their purpose.
The place where these nine examples were explained in very great detail is the sutra
that through its very name teaches their necessity and purpose.
Lord Maitreya
acknowledges his
sources, unlike so many
of today's authors
This is a very admirable stanza. As you know, Lord Maitreya is a tenth bhumi
Bodhisattva, at the last limit of the tenth bhumi. Today there are so many
authors who steal things from here and there, and plagiarise from the great
masters, and they have blind hope that nobody is going to find out that it has
actually been stolen. And unfortunately, many people don't realise this. And
these authors like to tell the world that it actually comes from their own
realisation, even though the Buddha taught this 2500 years ago. We find this a
lot within many books. Some authors are slightly more decent and give a little
credit to their teachers, albeit usually teachers that are long gone.
Respect towards the
teachers has degenerated,
especially among so-
called celebrity lamas
Whereas in India, classical
music performers stili
venerate their teachers
Respect towards one's teacher has really degenerated a lot, especially among the
celebrity lamas. They would not hesitate to sit higher than their own guru in
public, and they certainly wouldn't settle for less than equal. This is a big
degeneration. When I am in India, 1 sometimes go to Indian classical music
recitals, and it's so beautiful to see the students, the disciples, touching the feet
of their guru in front of the audience. This is only the wisdom of music, and yet
there's so much veneration. And by the way, some of these musicians are well
known celebrities. At one point, one of the musicians actually came into the
audience, because she noticed that her guru was sitting there, and she walked all
the way up to her guru before starting the performance. This is something really
good. Anyway, in this stanza, Maitreya is saying that he didn't come up with
these nine examples. They were taught by the Buddha in the Jñanaloka-sutra, in
order for the Bodhisattvas to happily and joyfully enter the Bodhisattva path.
The nine examples were
taught by the Buddha in
the Jñanaloka-sutra
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
254



36é
ཐོས་པ་ལས་བྱུང་ཤེས་པ་ཡི། །
སྣང་བ་རྒྱ་ཆེན་འདིས་བརྒྱན་པའི། །
བློ་ལྡན་མྱུར་དུ་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི། །
སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་ཀུན་ལ་འཇུག་པར་འགྱུར། }
The wise, adomed with great light of wisdom born of such study will swiftly enter all
Buddha domains.
Adorned with the far-reaching light of knowledge arisen from hearing it, those of insight
will quickly enter the field of experience of a Buddha.
The nine examples are
taught so Bodhisattvas
will joyfully enter the
Bodhisattva path
The nine examples are explained in that sutra so that the Bodhisattvas will enter
into the infinite activity of the Bodhisattva. Now we have finished all the nine
examples, and we will now have the nine meanings of the examples. It's already
finished, but this is like a repetition. Everything we have been doing is like a
summary, and now it will be explained again. Of course, that also begins with a
summary .
359
དེ་དོན་བོ་ཌར་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་གྱི། །
གཟུགས་བརྙན་ལ་སོགས་དཔེ་དག་ནི།
རྣམ་དགུ་བརྗོད་པ་དེ་ལ་ནི།
དེ་ཡི་བསྡུས་དོན་ངེས་པར་བཟུང་། །
The nine examples, such as Indra's reflection in lapis lazuli, have taught this point. The
meanings they illustrate so accurately:
This point is made clear in the nine examples of Indra's reflection in lapis lazuli and so
on. Their concise meaning, when grasped precisely,
The nine examples are
taught to explain the nine
meanings
This stanza is saying that these nine examples are given to explain the nine
meanings.
36
སྟོན་དང་གསུང་དང་ཁྱབ་པ་དང་
།།
སྤྲུལ་དང་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྤྲོ་བ་དང་
།
ཐུགས་གསུང་སྐུ་ཡི་གསང་བ་
་་བ་དང་།
ཐུགས་རྗེའི་བདག་ཉིད་ཐོབ་པ་ཉིད། །
Manifestation, speech, all-pervasiveness, the emanations, the shining forth of jñana, the
"mystery" of body, speech and mind and possession of a compassionate nature.
is to illustrate) display (of physical form), speech and the all-pervasiveness for mind),
illusory emanation, radiation of wisdom, the secret aspects of body, speech and mind,
and the fact that compassion itself is attained.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
255



So what are the nine meanings? Manifestation, speech, all-pervasiveness, and so
on.
361
འབད་རྩོལ་རྒྱུན་ཀུན་རབ་ཞི་བ། །
རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ་མེད་པའི་ཐུགས། །
དི་མེད་བོ་ཌུར་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་གྱི། །
གཟུགས་བརྙན་ཤར་བ་ལ་སོགས་བཞིན། །
Their mind ideation free, all channels of effort having been pacified totally, is just like
Indra's reflection and so on appearing in stainless lapis lazuli.
All streams of effort being fully appeased and the mind being free from all ideation is
similar to Indra's reflection appearing within stainless lapis lazuli and so forth.
The nine examples
symbolise that all efforts
and conceptions are
stopped, like Indra's
reflection in the lapis
lazuli
Now the question is, how do these nine examples exemplify or symbolise the
nine meanings? First, in brief, all the stream of effort is stopped, there are no
conceptions, it is peaceful, and so forth. This is symbolised by Indra's reflection
in the lapis lazuli and so forth.
362
འབད་རྩོལ་ཞི་བ་དམ་བཅས་ཏེ། །
རྟོག་མེད་ཐུགས་ནི་གཏན་ཚིགས་སོ། 1
རང་བཞིན་དོན་ནི་གྲུབ་དོན་དུ། །
དཔེ་ནི་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་གཟུགས་སོགས་ཡིན། །
klere, “pacification of effort" is a proposition. The logical justification is the "mind free
of ideation". The examples of Indra's form and so forth, help establish the point of
naturalness.
Appeasement of effort is the proposition; mind free from ideation its justification. In
order to establish the meaning of its nature the similes of Indra's form and so on are
given.
The meanings are the
subject, effortlessness is
the thesis, and the reason
is that Buddha doesn't
have conceptions
Once again, how do the nine examples symbolise the nine meanings? The nine
meanings are like the subject. The fact that there is no effort is the thesis
(damcha), and the reasoning is that Buddha doesn't have conceptions. As long as
there is no conception, it has to be effortless. And to symbolise this, we have
nine examples. Basically this stanza is saying that as long as there is no
conception, there is no effort.
As long as there is no
conception, there is no
effort. To symbolise this
we have nine examples
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
256



33
འདིར་ནི་སྐབས་དོན་འདི་ཡིན་ཏེ། །
སྟོན་པ་ལ་སོགསརྣམ་དགུ་ནི། །
སྟོན་པ་སྐྱེ་འཆི་དང་བྲལ་བ། །
འབད་པ་མེད་པར་རབ་འཇུག་པའོ། །
The point that this is making is that the teacher, who is beyond birth and death,
effortlessly manifests these nine - appearance etc.
Here the meaning of the chapter is as follows: The nine aspects of physical display and
so on show that the Teacher has no birth and death, and yet perfectly manifests
without any effort.
The purpose is to state
that Buddha has no birth,
no death and no effort
One of the purposes of the nine examples that we have been talking about is to
state that Buddha has no birth, no death, and no effort.
3944
གང་ཞིག་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་རྔ་དང་སྤྲིན་བཞིན་དང་། །
ཚངས་ཉིད་རིན་ཆེན་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་རྒྱལ་བཞིན། །
སྒྲ་བརྙན་ནམ་མཁའ་ས་བཞིན་སྲིད་པའི་བར། །
འབད་མེད་གཞན་དོན་མཛད་དེ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་རིག །
Effortless altruistic action for as long as there is existence – like that of Indra, the drum,
clouds, Brahma, the sun, the kingly wishíulfilling gem, an echo, space or the earth is
understood by the great yogin alone.
Something that, similar to Indra, the drum, clouds, Brahma, the sun, the precious king
of wish-granting gems, an echo, space and the earth, effortlessly and as long as
existence may last fulfils others' benefit is only conceived of by (supremel yogis.
Yogis on the Bodhisattva
path will understand that
the Buddha is like these
nine examples
Again he will explain how the meanings are shown by the examples, and again
we'll begin with a summary. Buddha is like Indra, the drum, the cloud, Brahma,
the sun, the wishfulfilling gem, an echo, space and earth. That's how the yogis,
those who dwell on the path of the Bodhisattvayana will understand the Buddha.
365
རིན་ཆེན་ལྷ་དབང་སྣང་ཞིང་སྟོན་པ་སྟེ། །
ལེགས་པར་འདོམས་མཛད་ལྷ་ཡི་རྔ་དང་འདྲ།
ཁྱབ་བདག་མཁྱེན་དང་བརྩེ་ཆེན་སྤྲིན་ཚོགས་ནི། །
མཐའ་ཡས་འགྲོ་བ་སྲིད་རྩེའི་བར་དུ་ཁྱབ། །
Similar to Indra's jewel appearance - manifestation, like the divine drum - the perfect
bestowing of instruction, the cloud-hosts – those of perfect knowledge and loving
compassion with which the all-embracing pervades limitless beings up to the summit of
conditioned existence.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
257



{Kayas) are displayed like the Lord of Gods appearing (in the gem. Explanation being
well bestowed resembles the drum of the gods. With cloud-hosts of insight and deep
concern, the All-Embracing pervades the limitless number of beings up to existence's
peak
366
ཚངས་བཞིན་ཟག་མེད་གནས་ལས་མི་བསྐྱོད་པར
།།
སྤྲུལ་པ་རྣམ་པ་དུ་མ་རབ་ཏུ་སྟོན། །
ཉི་བཞིན་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ་རབ་སྤྲོ་གང་
། 1
རྣམ་དག་རིན་ཆེན་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་འདྲའི་ཐུགས། །
Similarly to Brahma, they manifest many an emanation without ever departing from
their untainted domain. Like the sun, they radiate universally their jñana light and like
the wishfulfilling gem, perfectly pure, their mind.
Like Brahma, not moving from his sphere devoid of pollution, he perfectly displays a
manifold number of illusory appearances. Like a sun, primordial wisdom perfectly
radiates its brilliance. Buddha mind resembles a pure and precious wishfulfilling jewel.
367
རྒྱལ་བ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་གསུང་དེ་བྲག་ཆ་བཞིན་དུ་ཡི་གེ་མེད། །
སྐུ་ནི་ནམ་མཁའ་ལྟ་བུར་ཁྱབ་དང་གཟུགས་མེད་རྟག་པ་ཉིད། །
ས་གཞི་འགྲོ་བའི་དཀར་པོའི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྨན་རྣམས་མ་ལུས་པའི། །
རྣམ་པ་ཀུན་ཏུ་གཞིར་གྱུར་པ་ནི་སངས་ རྒྱུས་ས་ཡིན་ནོ། ། 1
Like an echo, devoid of any verbalization is the victors' speech. Like space, all
pervading, formless and permanent, their form and like the earth, the universal ground
for the medicinal herbs that are beings' virtues, is the state of Buddhahood.
Buddha speech has no letters, like an echo resounding from rock Similar to space, his
body is pervasive, formless and permanent. Like the earth, a Buddha is the ground
holding without exception and in any way all medicinal herbs of beings' unstained
qualities.
The first eight examples
are for the Buddha's
body, speech and mind
The ninth example
indicates that the Buddha
is like the earth, where
you can plant a seed and
cultivate enlightened
qualities
The form of the Buddha is like Indra's reflection on the lapis lazuli floor. The
speech of the Buddha is like the drum of heaven. His omniscient mind is all-
pervasive like the sky. His manifestation is like Brahma. His wisdom is like the
sun and the rays of the sun. The extraordinary aspect of his mind is like the
wishfulfilling gem. The extraordinary aspect of his speech is like an echo. The
extraordinary aspect of his form is like space. All these eight examples might
somehow lead you to think that the Buddha isn't able to bear or hold enlightened
qualities, so in order to negate that kind of thought, we have the ninth example
of the earth. This indicates that the Buddha is like the earth. He can be the
ground where you can plant the seed and cultivate it.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
258



36G
དག་པའི་རྒྱུན་འདྲ་ཡི། །
སེམས་ལ་སངས་རྒྱས་མཐོང་བའི་རྒྱུ།
དེ་དག་ས་ནི་མི་ཟློག་པའི། །
དད་པའི་དབང་པོ་བརྟས་པ་ཉིད། །
One sees Buddha in his mind, comparable to pure lapis lazuli, through mind's purity -
development of irreversible faith's faculty.
The cause for the Buddha to be seen in the mind similar to pure lapis lazuli is the purity
of this ground, (achieved by a firm faculty of irreversible faith.
369
།
དགེ་བ་སྐྱེ་དང་འཇིག་པས་ན། །
སངས་རྒྱས་གཟུགས་ནི་སྐྱེ་དང་འཇིག
བརྒྱ་བྱིན་བཞིན་དུ་ཐུབ་པ་ནི། །
ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ཡི་སྐྱེ་འཇིག་མེད། །
Since this virtue appears and disappears, the forms of the Buddhas also appear and
disappear. However, like indra, the great sage's dharmakaya is beyond arising and
destruction.
Since virtue arises and ceases, the form of a Buddha arises and ceases. Like Indra, the
Muni who is dharmakaya is free front arising and ceasing.
37
དེ་བཞིན་དུ་ནི་འབད་མེད་པར། །
སྐྱེ་མེད་འགག་མེད་ཆོས་སྐུ་ལས། །
སྲིད་པ་ཇི་སྲིད་གནས་བར་དུ། །
སྟོན་པ་ལ་སོགས་མཛད་པ་འཇུག །
Like him, in a way that is effortless, from this dharmakaya without birth or death, he
engages in activity, such as manifestation, for as long as conditioned existence goes on.
Effortlessly, like {Indra) he manifests his deeds, displaying (physical appearance and so
forth, from birthless and deathless dharmakaya for as long as samsaric existence may
last.
On the absolute level,
Buddha has no arising or
ceasing, but on the
relative level we have the
manifestation of the
Buddha, and we may still
have doubts about
whether this is effortless
To clear doubts about how the examples symbolise the qualities of the Buddha,
once again they are explained in a different manner. We discussed some of these
doubts during the questions and answers yesterday. On the absolute level,
Buddha does not have arising and ceasing, and yet Buddha has manifested being
born in Lumbini, passing into parinirvana in Kushinagar and so on. Also,
although we have talked again and again about effortlessness, there still seems
to be an effort when we talk about the manifestation of the Buddha. For
instance, there is arising from six years of penance, going to Magadha,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
259



Why did Buddha choose to
achieve enlightenment in
Bodh Gaya rather than
somewhere else?
destroying the maras, achieving enlightenment and then deciding not to teach,
and then upon the request of Indra and Brahma choosing to teach in Sarnath.
And although we keep on saying that he has no intention, there are doubts about
why Shakyamuni Buddha chose to achieve enlightenment under a bodhi tree in
Bodh Gaya, rather than somewhere else in the world. These are many
explanations for this, and especially the Vajrayana has amazing things to say, but
on a more common level it's believed that once upon a time a very long time ago,
100 million Bodhisattvas were simultaneously beheaded by a very vicious king on
that spot, and they all made different prayers. A thousand of them prayed to be
teachers, some prayed to be patrons, and others prayed to be the holders of the
teachings, such as the disciples. We have talked about these kinds of doubts
many times. Anyway, it is explained in these stanzas.
When you perceive the
appearance of a Buddha,
it's because there is no
obstacle to your virtuous
thoughts and activities.
Your lapis lazuli floor is
clean. But neither the
presence nor absence of
dirt affects the Buddha
When you perceive the appearance of a Buddha and his activities, and when you
perceive that he seemingly has intentions of walking up and down, begging,
teaching, choosing Bodh Gaya and all of that, it's because there is no obstacle to
your virtuous or wholesome thoughts and actions. It's like seeing the reflection
of Indra when there is no dirt on the lapis lazuli floor. When you have devotion
and inspiration, then you see these things. And when you don't have devotion or
inspiration, then you don't see these appearances. But like the reflection of
Indra, neither the absence nor the presence of devotion or dirt affects the actual
Buddha. And that's how the Buddha manifests and benefits people,
The entire Mahayana path
is based on this view, like
the story of the dog's
tooth bearing relics
We have talked about that. Basically the entire Mahayana practice is based on
this logic or view. It's like the popular story in The Words of My Perfect Teacher
(Kunzang Lama'i Shelung) about the dog's tooth bearing relics. When you have
that kind of devotion, it invokes the blessings of the Buddha even from a dog's
tooth. For instance, although I wish that you would do prostrations to the holy
objects here beside me, some of you may be aiming your prostrations towards
me. And if you prostrate with the right attitude and motivation, I'm sure you'll
get the benefit. Strictly speaking, the 'credit for what you receive should go to
your own merit, devotion and inspiration. Because although I may be the object
of your prostration, 1 haven't moved one inch from being a dog's tooth!
But even if you know it's
your own merit that's
creating the benefit, that
doesn't mean you should
stop prostrating. Keep
the donkey with you even
while you try to ride the
horse
Some of you asked about the donkey and horse issue that we discussed a couple
of days ago. Well, even if you know that it's your own merit and devotion that's
creating all this benefit, it doesn't mean that you should stop prostrating. You
can still keep on doing prostrations to me, because you will still get the benefit.
And meanwhile, because most of the time my mind is all over the place, I don't
even notice that you're doing prostrations. And so I won't acknowledge it, so I'll
forget to dedicate that act, and therefore for many lifetimes to come, probably
the next 500 lifetimes, I will have to pay my own karmic debt. I will have to
prostrate or bow down, becoming a sycophant to all kinds of people, again and
again. The fact that many of you are ass-kissers is because you, like me, may
have forgotten to acknowledge other people's venerations and respect to you in
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
260



As Patrul Rinpoche said,
famas in particular should
be careful to acknowledge
offerings and prostrations
many previous lifetimes, and now you just have to kiss ass. Patrul Rinpoche
gives very extended explanations of this, especially for people like us lamas,
about how we misuse offerings (kor), offerings of respect or whatever. I don't
think you will have this problem so much, but people like me have it a lot. And
the law of cause, condition and effect does not give preferential treatment to any
'special people. Patrul Rinpoche's example of a big fish being eaten by lots of
small fish, and lots of small fish being eaten by the big fish, is a perfect example
of spiritual masters and their disciples these days.
Day 9
Introduction
The nine examples of the
Buddha's activity are
ordinary. The meanings
far surpass the examples
The examples are also not
similar to the Buddha, so
they cannot be examples.
This is why there are nine
examples, as each one is
like an answer to a
refutation of the previous
example
Maitreya concludes this chapter by indicating that the nine examples of the
Buddha are ordinary, and the nine meanings far surpass the nine examples. He
has explained that the nine examples are similar to the Buddha. Now he's saying
that they are also not similar. The Sakyapa scholar Sakya Pandita said that that
some similarity exists between all things, but no two things are absolutely
identical. If one thing is similar to another it is not 'it', and if it is dissimilar, then
it is not an analogy, so it cannot be an example. This is from Buddhist logic, the
pramana. In order to define something as an example, there has to be some kind
of similarity. It's a bit like that here, and it's also one of the reasons why there
are nine examples. Each successive example is like an answer to a refutation of
the previous example that points out how it is not similar to the Buddha.
371
དཔེ་འདི་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས་པ་ཡིན། །
དོན་ནི་འདི་ཡིན་རིམ་པ་ཡང་།
སྔ་མ་ཕྱི་མ་ཆོས་མི་མཐུན།
སྤངས་པའི་སྒོ་ནས་བརྗོད་པ་ཡིན། ། !
Here is a summarized meaning of the examples taught through an order where
dissimilarities are eliminated from the former to the latter.
The condensed meaning of the examples is contained} herein. Their order is also not
arbitraryl, as they are abandoned such that properties not in tune are eliminated
{progressing/ from the former to the latter.
372
སངས་རྒྱས་གཟུགས་བརྙན་ལྟ་བུ་སྟེ།
དབྱངས་དང་མི་ལྡན་དེ་འདྲ་མིན། །
ལྷ་ཡི་རྔ་བཞིན་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ། །
དོན་བྱེད་མིན་པ་དེ་འདྲ་མིན། ། 1
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
261



The Buddha is like that reflection, but not the same - that doesn't have his melody. He
is like the celestial drum, but not the same - it is not universally beneficial.
A Buddha is like the reflection and yet dissimilar, since the reflection is not endowed
with his melody. He is like the drum of the gods and yet dissimilar, since the drum does
not bring benefit everywhere.
3}
སྤྲིན་ཆེན་དང་མཚུངས་དོན་མེད་པའི། །
ས་བོན་སྤོང་མིན་དེ་འདྲ་མིན། །
ཚངས་ཆེན་བཞིན་ཏེ་གཏན་དུ་ནི།
སྨིན་པར་བྱེད་མིན་དེ་འདྲ་མིན། །
He is like the vast cloud, but not the same - it removes not useless seeds. He is like
Mahabrahma, but not the same - he does not engender lasting maturity.
He is similar to a vast cloud and yet dissimilar, since a cloud does not eliminate
worthless seeds. He is like the mighty Brahma and yet dissimilar, since Brahma does
not continuously cause maturity.
374
ཉི་མའི་གཟུགས་བཞིན་གཏན་དུ་ནི། །
མུན་པ་འཇོམས་མིན་དེ་འདྲ་མིན།
།
ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་འདྲ་འབྱུང་བ་ནི་ ་
རྙེད་པར་མི་དཀའ་དེ་འདྲ་མིན། །
He is like the form of the sun, but not the same - it cannot vanquish darkness forever.
He is like the wishfulfilling gem, but not the same - its appearance is not that difficult to
encounter.
He is like the orb of the sun and yet dissimilar, since the sun does not always overcome
darkness. He is like a wish-granting gem and yet dissimilar, since the gem's appearance
is not so rarely found.
375
སྒྲ་བརྙན་བཞིན་ཏེ་རྐྱེན་ལས་ནི། །
བྱུང་བ་དེ་དང་འདྲ་བའང་མིན། །
ནམ་མཁའ་དང་འདྲ་དག་པ་ཡི། །
གཞི་མིན་དེ་དང་འདྲ་བའང་མིན། །
He is like an echo, but not the same - it arises through circumstance. He is like space,
but not the same-that is not the basis for goodness.
He is similar to an echo and yet dissimilar, since an echo arises from cause and
condition. He is similar to space and yet dissimilar, since space is not a ground of pure
virtue.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
262



376
འཇིག་རྟེན་འཇིག་རྟེན་ལས་འདས་པའི། །
འགྲོ་བའི་ཕུན་ཚོགས་མ་ལུས་པ། །
དེ་གནས་པ་ཡི་རྟེན་ཡིན་ཕྱིར། །
ས་ཡི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་དགུ་དང་འདྲ། !
སངས་རྒྱུས་བྱུང་ཆུག་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས། །
འཇིག་རྟེན་འདས་པའི་ལམ་འབྱུང་ཕྱིར། །
དགེ་བའི་ལས་ལམ་བསམ་གཏན་དང་། །
ཚད་མེད་པ་དང་གཟུགས་མེད་འབྱུང་
།
He is like the mandala of earth, being the supportive ground for absolutely every single
goodness in sentient life - mundane and supramundane, because the supramundane
arises on the basis of the Buddha's enlightenment, as do the paths of virtuous acts,
concentrative meditation, the limitless contemplations and the formless ones.
Being the lasting basis for every goodness, the best possible for all without exception, for
worldly beings and those beyond the world, activity is similar to the mandala of earth.
Because based upon all Buddha's enlightenment, the path beyond the world will arise,
as will the path of virtuous deeds, mental stability and the immeasurable and formless
contemplations.
For example, although
Buddha is like the
reflection of Indra, the
reflection doesn't have
speech. So we have the
example of the heavenly
drum.
The objections to the nine
examples
1) A reflection has no
speech
2) The heavenly drum
cannot be heard on earth
3) The cloud cannot
benefit beyond this life
4) Brahma's effects only
last for one lifetime
5) The sun is not always
visible in the sky
6) The wishfulfilling jewe!
is not rare
7) The echo can come
from an ordinary voice
8) The sky cann used
as the basis for virtue
9) The earth only bears
ordinary fruits
For example, when you say that the form of Buddha is like the reflection of Indra,
someone could refute you by saying that a reflection doesn't have sound or
speech. That's why the example of the heavenly drum is introduced. But the
heavenly drum can only be heard in heaven, not on earth and so on, so we have
the third example of the cloud. But a cloud can only benefit during this life, this
worldly life, and cannot really benefit beyond this life. So to answer that, the
example is Brahma. But the effects of Brahma only last for one lifetime. If you
worship or get acquainted with Brahma, it only gives you a result once. It's a bit
like Nanda's story. Once the effect of that cause is finished, then you are back to
where you started. So to answer that, we bring the next example, which is the
sun. But the sun also sets and has eclipses, so the next example is the
wishfulfilling gem. But one could think that the wishfulfilling gem is not that
rare, relatively speaking, because you can get it from the King of the Nagas. So
as an answer to that, we introduce the example of the echo, although this is one
thing that I don't understand very well. However, one might think that the echo
can be created by an ordinary voice, so the answer to that is the example of the
sky. But the sky is not usable. It's sort of uncompounded, so to clarify that
doubt, we come back to the example of earth. But even the earth only bears
ordinary plants and fruits, whereas the field of the Buddha gives birth to both
ordinary and sublime fruits. The Buddhafield is the source of virtuous thoughts
and actions, such as the ten virtuous actions, the four samadhis and the four
immeasurable thoughts. From this Buddhafield also comes the cause of the
The Buddhafield gives
birth to both ordinary and
subtime fruits
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
263



formless realms, such as the four meditative absorptions. I'd like to explain this
a little bit.
As long as a being has a
want or need, some kind
of goal, it is a vessel for
the Buddha's activity
Potato chips don't have
wants or needs
We have the Buddha-nature, and that Buddha has all the qualities that we have
been talking about. Broadly speaking, as long as a being has this wanting or
needing, you can safely say it's a vessel for the Buddha's activity. Buddha's
compassion and manifestation can enter it. On a very mundane and shallow
level, it might be that you don't want to have pain, and consider pain as
something not so good, although of course that's also very relative. Further than
that, on a very subtle level, you want things. You have some kind of a goal and
some needs to satisfy, of course starting with yourself. By contrast, I don't think
these potato chips have any wants or needs. I'm not saying that's something
good or something bad. There's no judgement here. Of course ignorance plays
a very important role here. As soon as there is a want or need, ignorance is
already there as well, not a step behind, ready to manipulate this wanting.
As soon as there is a want
or need, ignorance is
already there ready to
manipulate them, not a
step behind
Strongly obscured and
ignorant people have all
kinds of monstrous
desires, like wanting to
eat another human being
People that are strongly obscured and ignorant have all kinds of incredible or
monstrous desires, like wanting to eat another human being. And then they look
for someone who is willing to give up their body and they actually finding
someone, because there is another person who has that kind of desire. I find
this to be very obscured. This happened recently, isn't that right? Someone
wanted to eat a human body, and found someone through the Internet who
volunteered to do this. And they filmed it while it was happening. As we said
earlier, human beings are all different in terms of their elements, constituencies
and senses. We have always been generalising. All this was happening between
three human beings, the two of them and us. But if we look beyond the human
realm, we can see that we are doing exactly the same thing with beef and chicken
and prawns. The only reason we don't think that it's sick or hideous is because
we have practised it longer. We just couldn't accept it if one day a fashion
magazine had a picture of a beautiful tigress holding a bag made out of the skin
of Cindy Crawford! Anyway, the point is that we all have something that we
want. And of course ignorance gets involved, and makes this want into
something very obscure and harmful to oneself and others.
When you get what you
want or need, you are
happy. So there is a
definition of happiness,
which is different for
everyone
The important news is that there is wanting, and when you get what you want or
what you need, you are happy. So there is a definition of happiness. And this
so-called phenomenon of happiness is different for everyone. Some of us who
are slightly more fortunate, meaning slightly less ignorant, begin to think, "f1
really want to be happy, it's important that I shouldn't harm others". We don't
literally think like that, but we think something along those lines in a very
obscured way. And this is how things like good conduct, philanthropy,
sympathy, charity and so on emerge, because you realise that they give you a lot
of happiness. Other people are even less obscured, so they feel they should
relax and let their minds be peaceful, and so they engage in shamatha
meditation. It is the same for all these different varieties of virtuous actions.
People then engage in
different types of virtuous
actions. Some engage in
philanthropy, others in
shamatha or more
sophisticated forms of
meditation
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
264



Some want to cut the root
of samsara
Although qualities and
virtues can grow on this
Buddhafield, the same is
not true for ignorance,
from a Mahayana point of
view. Defilements are
temporary and removable,
not the Buddha's qualities
Then there are even more sophisticated and advanced varieties, such as
samadhis, immeasurable thoughts, and meditative absorptions. And most
important, some beings are not satisfied with these either, and want to cut the
root of samsara. All these things can be born and grow on this Buddhafield. So
now we have a question, and some of you have already asked this. What about
ignorance? What about hideous wants and desires, like a person who wants to
eat someone else's flesh. What are these things? Do they also grow on this
Buddhafield? From a strict Mahayana point of view, the answer is no. They are
not the Buddha-nature's qualities. They are temporary, which is why they are
removable.
There is a problem with
the way we think about
washing a shirt. We say
"my shirt has become
dirty" as if the dirt has
somehow come from the
shirt itself
Since we are at the end of the seven vajra points, I'd like to talk about Buddha-
nature. There are so many things that we can understand from the words
'Buddha-nature', and I think all of us have got a picture of it, but let's return to
an old example that we used a long time ago. When we wash our clothes, we
know that the dirt that has collected on the clothes is temporary, which is why
it's washable. But there is problem with the way we think about this. Our mind
has somehow learned to think that the dirt comes from the shirt itself, from the
fabric or something, because every time we wear the shirt it ends up becoming
dirty. We don't think this literally, but this is how we end up thinking about it
emotionally. We say, "my shirt is dirty" or "my shirt has become dirty". I'm
telling you this because I'm trying to explain why all wholesome qualities and
virtuous actions grow from the Buddhafield, but why ugly and unwholesome
things are not part of the Buddhafield. It's a little difficult to explain this. Of
course, ultimately, from the point of view of absolute truth, you cannot say that
Buddha-nature is good or bad. But when we talk about the qualities, I guess we
have to say that Buddha-nature is good rather than bad. And the reason we say
Buddha-nature is good rather than bad is because the bad can be removed, and
the good cannot be removed. That's why it's called Buddha-nature.
Ultimately, you cannot say
Buddha-nature is good or
bad. But we say it is
good, because bad can be
removed and good cannot
A shirt may look dirty, but
its real cleanliness cannot
be removed. Likewise, we
call Buddha-nature the
ground for all enlightened
qualities
When you bought your shirt from the shop it was ultimately beyond clean and
beyond dirty, of course. You didn't pay extra for a certain amount of dirt. But
for the sake of communication it's safer to say, "the shirt is in fact clean" rather
than "the shirt is dirty", because the dirt is removable. No matter how dirty it is,
how covered in mud and sweat and all that, the clean aspect of the shirt can
never be removed. It's just its nature. It may look dirty, smell dirty, and all of
that, but the real cleanliness of the shirt can never be removed. It's still there,
and cannot be removed. That's the analogy. And this is why we call Buddha-
nature the vessel or the ground of all enlightened qualities.
The Shentongpas say the
qualities are all there
already, whereas the
Rangtongpas would say
that Buddha-nature is
where good things grow
Well, according to the Shentongpas, the qualities are all there already. But even if
you were a Rangtongpa rather than a Shentongpa, you would say it's where good
things grow. You have heard all this already, but I'm just fine-tuning, as
Buddha-nature is really important. Let me imitate Maitreya a little bit, and say
that Buddha-nature is better than the example of cleaning the shirt. When he
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
265



Once you 'clean the
Buddha-nature, no more
dirt can collect. That
requires some dualism,
and that's all gone
gives us an example, he says the actual meaning is better than the example.
Likewise, you can clean the shirt and reach some kind of first stage of
cleanliness, but then it can become dirty again. But when, for the sake of
communication, you 'clean' the Buddha-nature, the dirt cannot come back. Once
you have cleaned to the root, there's just no way that any more dirt will collect,
as that requires some kind of reference or dualism, and that's all gone. And
that's the end of the chapter.
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུ
བོ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་རིགས་རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་བ་ལས།
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་ཕྲིན་ལས་མཛད་པའི་སྐབས་ཏེ་བཞི་པའོ།། ! 11
This was the fourth chapter, on the tathagatas' activity, from the Analysis of the
Potential for the Rare and Sublime in this "Ultimate Mahayana Treatise on the
Changeless Continuity".
This was the section "Unfolding the Activity of the Tathagata," the fourth chapter of The
Commentary on the Highest Continuity of the Mahayana Dharma which Analyzes the
Disposition of the Rare and the Sublime Ones.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
266



Chapter Five
Benefit
Now we come to the last chapter, which talks about the benefit of hearing these
things. We have heard about the Buddha element, the Buddha-nature (sangyey
gyi kham) that was explained at the beginning of this text with the nine
examples. Then enlightenment. And then the qualities of enlightenment, such
as the ten strengths and 32 major marks. And then the activity of this Buddha,
which was also explained with another set of nine examples.
377
སངས་རྒྱས་ཁམས་དང་སངས་རྒྱས་བྱང་ཆུབ་དང་། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་དང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཕྲིན་ལས་ཏེ། །
དག་པའི་སེམས་ཅན་གྱིས་ཀྱང་བསམ་བྱ་མིན།
འདི་ནི་འདྲེན་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་ཡིན། །
Buddha-nature, the Buddha's enlightenment, Buddhahood's qualities and the activity of
the Buddhas - these are even inconceivable for purified beings, being the domain of
experience of their "leaders".
Buddha element, Buddha awakening, Buddha qualities and Buddha activity cannot be
thought, not even by purified beings. They are the field of experience of their guides.
Even tenth bhumi
Bodhisattvas cannot
understand this. So what
can ordinary beings do?
Even the sublime sentient beings, which refers to the tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas,
even they can't conceive or fathom this. It is the object only of an enlightened
being. Only an enlightened being can understand this. So the question is, what
can we do? If it cannot be conceived or fathomed even by tenth bhumi
Bodhisattvas, what can we do then?
378
བློ་ལྡན་རྒྱལ་བའི་ཡུལ་དེ་ལ་མོས་པ། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཡོན་ཏན་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་སྣོད་འགྱུར་ཏེ། ། !
བསམ་མེད་ཡོན་ཏན་ཚོགས་ལ་མངོན་དགའ་བས། །
སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན་གྱི་བསོད་ནམས་ཟིལ་གྱིས་གནོན། །
The wise who have trust in this domain of the Buddhas become vessels for multitudes
of Buddha-qualities. Genuinely delighting in hosts of inconceivable qualities, they
surpass the virtues of every sentient being.
Those of insight who have devotion to this Buddha domain will become vessels for the
multitude of all Buddha qualities, while those truly delighting in these inconceivable
properties will exceed in merit (the good actions of all sentient beings.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
267



Someone who has joy and
enthusiasm for the seven
vajra points will outshine
even great actions of
generosity and discipline
So, what can we ordinary beings do? First there is a summary. Lord Maitreya is
talking about someone who aspires to Buddha-nature, the Buddha-nature in
particular but the seven vajra points in general. Someone who has aspiration,
joy, interest, and enthusiasm towards this - someone who gets a thrill out of this.
Because this person's vision is big, they are getting a thrill out of something that
cannot even be conceived of by the tenth bhumi Bodhisattvas. Other people may
be doing all kinds of great things such as generosity and discipline and the rest,
but their aim is something fathomable and conceivable. It's not a big vision.
And he's saying that all the merit from their actions and good deeds can be
outshone just by someone getting a thrill out of this. That's a big statement!
Washing your shirt with
an aspiration for the state
beyond dirty and clean is
a big vision. If someone
else's agenda isn't aimed
at that unfathomable
phenomenon, then their
agenda is very limited
This stanza is amazing, so powerful. When you are washing your shirt, the state
that is beyond dirty and beyond clean is unfathomable, so having the aspiration
for that state is a big vision. If someone else is washing their shirt and that
unfathomable phenomenon is not their agenda, then it's a very limited agenda.
So when the second person washes their shirt, there's a big difference, as their
washing is like building a sandcastle. Somehow, unconsciously, they know it
won't work. And everything is like that, even when we offer incense, or a butter
lamp. There's a really big difference between doing these things with an
aspiration towards Buddha-nature, and doing the same things just to collect
some merit so that you will have a long life or whatever. And now this is
explained further.
379
གང་ཞིག་བྱང་ཆུབ་དོན་དུ་གཉེར་བས་གསེར་ཞིང་ནོར་བུས་སྤྲས་པ་ནི། །
སངས་རྒྱས་ཞིང་རྡུལ་མཉམ་པ་ཉིན་རེ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་རྣམས་ལ་རྟག་འབུལ་ན། །
གཞན་གང་འདི་ལས་ཚིག་ཙམ་ཐོས་ཤིང་ཐོས་ནས་ཀྱང་ནི་མོས་ན་འདི། །
སྦྱིན་པ་ལས་བྱུང་དགེ་བ་དེ་ལས་བསོད་ནམས་ཆེས་མང་ཐོབ་པར་
པར་འགྱུར། །
One who hears but one word of this and, having heard, has faith in it will attain greater
virtue than another who, striving for bodhi, offers golden lands adorned with jewels,
equal in number to all the atoms of the Buddhafields, to the Dharma-king daily.
Someone striving for enlightenment may turn to the Dharma kings, offering golden fields
adorned with gems of equal (number) to the atoms in the Buddhatields and continue
doing so every day. Another may just hear a word of this and upon hearing it become
filled with devotion. He will attain merits far greater and more manifold than the virtue
sprung from this practise of giving.
Someone making daily
offerings of countless
gold ornaments to
innumerable Buddhas
creates a lot of merit
Imagine someone making offerings of countless ornaments to the Buddhas,
garlands of solid gold decorated with precious jewels, as many garlands as there
are atoms in the universe. And not just to one or two Buddhas, but to as many
Buddhas as there are particles of dust in the universe, and not just for a day or
two, but every day. That must have so much merit.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
268



Imagine someone else, someone seeking enlightenment, who doesn't have gold
ornaments or anything like that, but who has so much joy, happiness and
aspiration to the four points:
The four points:
1) We all have Buddha-
nature
2) The dirt is removable
3) The 32 major marks
are all there intact
4) Buddha's activity
manifests all the time
1) All of us have Buddha-nature.
2) The dirt, the emotions and the defilements, are removable.
3) Upon removing them all the enlightened qualities such as the 32 major marks
are there intact, without a single one handicapped or incapacitated.
4) The Buddha's activity manifests all the time, as in the nine examples such as
Indra's reflection on the lapis lazuli floor.
If you have aspiration and
joy upon hearing these
four points, your merit is
much greater than all
those gold offerings
Lord Maitreya is saying that when you have aspiration and joy even at hearing
these words, your merit is much greater than the person who is offering the
countless gold ornaments to thousands of Buddhas every day. Of course we are
not saying that you should stop engaging in generosity. We are simply saying
that if you do whatever you do with an aspiration to these four points, it will
make all the difference. This is really important.
This doesn't mean you
shouldn't be generous.
But if you have the
aspiration to these four
points in whatever you
do, it will make all the
difference
380
བློ་ལྡན་གང་ཞིག་བླ་མེད་བྱང་ཆུབ་འདོད་པས་བསྐལ་པ་དུ་མར་ཡང་། །
ལུས་ངག་ཡིད་ཀྱི་འབད་པ་མེད་པར་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་དྲི་མེད་སྲུང་བྱེད་ལ། །
གཞན་གང་འདི་ལས་ཚིག་ཙམ་ཐོས་ཤིང་ཐོས་ནས་ཀྱང་ནི་མོས་ན་འདི། །
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ལས
བ་ལས་བྱུང་དགེ་བ་དེ་ལས་བསོད་ནམས་ཆེས་མང་ཐོབ་པར་འགྱུར། ། |
One who hears but one word of this and, having heard, has faith in it, will attain greater
virtue that that of the right conduct of the wise who, longing for highest enlightenment,
keeps effortless right conduct of body, speech and mind - even be it for many cosmic
aeons.
An intelligent person wishing for enlightenment may by body, speech and mind guard a
flawless moral conduct and do so effortlessly, even through many eons. Another may
just hear a word of this and upon hearing it become filed with devotion. He will attain
merits far greater and more manifold than the virtue sprung from this discipline.
For Buddhists, wisdom is
more important that
virtuous actions such as
generosity, discipline or
ethics
Likewise, consider someone who is engaging in practice of discipline, very
diligently refraining from non-virtuous actions of body, speech and mind. This
has so much merit. But again, all that diligence is as nothing compared to
someone who has aspiration to these four points. These stanzas have clearly
stated, just like in the Madhyamika, that for Mahayana Buddhists, actually for
Buddhists in general, wisdom is more important than actions. It surpasses all
things like generosity, discipline, morality or ethics. It's much more important to
think all sentient beings have Buddha-nature, that defilements are removable,
and upon removing their defilements all the qualities and activities of Buddha are
present. It's much more important to think of these four points rather than
being completely fanatical about religious laws and not having these four.
It's more important to
think of these four points
than to be fanatical about
religious laws and not
have these four
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
269



381
གང་ཞིག་འདི་ན་སྲིད་པ་གསུམ་གྱི་ཉོན་མོངས་མེ་འཇིལ་བསམ་གཏ
མི་འཇིལ་བསམ་གཏན་ནི། །
ལྷ་དང་ཚངས་གནས་མཐར་སོན་རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་འཕོ་མེད་ཐབས་བསྒོམས་ལ། ། 1
གཞན་གང་འདི་ལས་ཚིག་ཙམ་ཐོས་ཤིང་ཐོས་ནས་ཀྱང་ནི་མོས་ན་འདི། །
བསམ་གཏན་ལ
པ་གཏན་ལས་བྱུང་དགེ་བ་དེ་ལས་བསོད་ནམས་ཆེས་མང་ཐོབ་པར་འགྱུར། །
One who hears but one word of this and, having heard, has faith in it, will attain greater
virtue than that of the meditative stability of others whose dhyana rids the three worlds
of defilements' fires and brings achievement of the divine state of Brahma's paradise,
even if it is practised as a means to supreme immutable enlightenment.
Someone here may finally achieve the divine meditative stabilities and Brahma's abode,
thus quenching all affliction's fire within the three realms of existence, and may cultivate
these as a means to reach unchanging and perfect enlightenment. Another may just
hear a word of this and upon hearing it become filled with devotion. He will attain
merits far greater and more manifold than the virtue sprung from this meditation.
Someone with motivation
to these four points has
much greater merit even
than someone practicing
vipashyana in order to
obtain enlightenment
Similarly, imagine someone practicing samadhis in order to extinguish the fires
of the defilements, the fires of desire and anger, or practicing the four
absorptions, or even practicing vipashyana in order to obtain the Buddha, but
without the motivation or aspiration to these four points. Again, someone who
has motivation to these four has much greater merit.
382
གང་ཕྱིར་སྦྱིན་པས་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་དག་ནི་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་ཅིང་། །
ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་མཐོ་རིས་བསྒོམས་པས་ཉོན་མོངས་སྤོང་བྱེད་ལ། །
ཤེས་རབ་ཉོན་མོངས་ཤེས་བྱ་ཀུན་སློང་དེ་ཡི་ཕྱིར། །
འདི་ན་ཆོག་ཉིད་དེ་དེ་ཡི་རྒྱུ་ནི་འདི་ཐོས་ཡིན། །
Generosity brings affluence, right conduct leads to the higher states, meditative stability
renoves defilements, but prajña removes all clefilements and the cognitive. Therefore
this prajña is the most excellent thing: its cause is to study such as this.
Why {is it so beneficial}? Generosity only yields wealth, discipline leads to the higher
states of existence and meditation removes affliction. Discriminative wisdom fully
abandons all afflictions and thindrances to) knowledge. It is therefore supreme and its
cause is studying these.
Only wisdom can uproot
the defilements and
cognitive obscurations,
which is why it is
important to hear these
four points
Ordinary generosity will give the result of wealth. Ordinary discipline and moral
conduct will give you the result of higher rebirth. Ordinary meditation can
suppress emotions. But only wisdom can uproot the defilements and the
cognitive obscurations. This is why it's important to hear the sutras and shastras
that explain the four points. Again this is explained in a more detailed fashion,
beginning with another summary.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
270



383
གནས་དང་དེ་ནི་གྱུར་པ་དང་། །
དེ་ཡི་ཡོན་ཏན་དོན་སྒྲུབ་སྟེ། །
རྒྱལ་བ་ཡི་ནི་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡུལ།
།
རྣམ་བཞི་ཇི་སྐད་བརྗོད་འདི་ལ། །
This presence, what is becomes, its qualities, and the accomplishment of the good -
these four points are the domain of Buddhas' perfect knowledge, as explained.
The presence of the element), its result, its qualities and the achievement of benefit are
the objects of understanding of a Buddha
344
བློ་ལྡན་ཡོད་དང་ནུས་ཉིད་དང་། །
ཡོན་ཏན་ལྡན་པ་མོས་པས་ནི།
མྱུར་དུ་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ཡི། །
གོ་འཕང་ཐོབ་པའི་སྐལ་ལྡན་འགྱུར། །
Through faith in these, the fact of this presence, it being the power and with qualities
endowed, the wise are quickly ripe for tathagala achievement.
When towards these four, as explained above, one of understanding is filled with
devotion to their presence, ability and qualities, he will be quickly endowed with the
fortune by which one attains the state of a tathagata.
Bodhisattvas who are
fortunate and wise wilt
have devotion to these
four points, and will know
that they apply to others.
With this attitude, they
will swiftly attain
enlightenment
These two stanzas are also ones that you should write somewhere so you can see
them again and again. This element of the Buddha, this Buddha-nature, is with
us. These defilements are removable. And upon removing them, the qualities of
the Buddha are there. And not only the qualities, but also the activities of the
Buddha are there. If someone is fortunate and wise, they will have devotion to
these four points. And when this Bodhisattva looks at others, this Bodhisattva
will know that Buddha-nature also exists within them, that their dirt is
removable, that upon removing it the qualities of the Buddha are there intact,
and that the activities of the Buddha are manifesting. With this kind of attitude,
such a Bodhisattva will swiftly attain enlightenment.
395
བསམ་མི་
མི་ཁྱབ་པའི་ཡུལ་འདི་ནི། །
ཡོད་དང་བདག་འདྲས་ཐོབ་ནུས་དང་། །
ཐོབ་པ་འདི་འདྲའི་ཡོན་ཏན་དང་། །
ལྡན་ཞེས་དད་པས་མོས་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
Through faith, one believes this inconceivable domain present, achievable by
"someone like me" and, once attained, to have such qualities and to have possession.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
27



Those who realize: "This inconceivable object is present and someone like me can
attain it; its attainment will hold such qualities and endowment" will aspire to it, filled
with faith
386
འདུན་བརྩོན་དྲན་དང་བསམ་གཏན་དང་།
ཤེས་རབ་ལ་སོགས་ཡོན་ཏན་སྣོད།
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་ནི་དེ་དག་ལ།
རྟག་ཏུ་ཉེ་བར་གནས་པར་འགྱུར། །
Therefore is bodhiçitta ever-present in them as the vessel for the qualities of earnest
aspiration, joyful endeavour, mindfulness, meditative stability, prajña and the others.
Thus becoming vessels of all qualities, such as longing, diligence, mindfulness,
meditative stability, wisdom and so on, bodhicitta will be ever-present in them.
One of the main
challenges for Mahayana
practitioners is not having
firm bodhicitta, and so we
lose courage when we
encounter difficulties
It's easy to talk about
having compassion for all
sentient beings', but it's
abstract. It's much more
difficult to have
compassion towards just
one sentient being
These two stanzas talk about one of the main challenges for the Mahayana
practitioner, which is not having firm bodhicitta. And also the reason why we
don't have firm bodhicitta. It's like this. If you're driving from here to Paris, you
know that Paris is there. It's reachable. So you know that every time your wheels
turn, you're getting closer. Maybe there will be some obstacles along the way,
but you know that if you continue on your journey, Paris is not going to deceive
you. It's there. But for Bodhisattvas like us, when we try to benefit sentient
beings, we encounter all kinds of sentient beings, including some very difficult
ones. And then we lose courage. As Patrul Rinpoche said, it's easy to talk about
"all sentient beings", about having compassion and bodhicitta for all sentient
beings, as it's kind of abstract. But having compassion towards one sentient
being is much more difficult than having compassion to all sentient beings, as
you would probably prefer to keep this one sentient being to one side and look
for easier sentient beings to deal with first!
Even the most seasoned
practitioners forget they
have Buddha-nature when
they pray to the Buddha.
Our practices become
very theistic if we forget
these four points
And even before we think about other sentient beings, just having courage based
on oneself is difficult. When even the most seasoned Mahayana practitioners
practice, they trust the path, the Buddha, the blessings of the Buddha and all of
that, but they forget that this element of the Buddha is with them. And because
of that, all our methods of practice, all our practices, are basically always very
theistic. It's a bit like praying to the Buddha so that the Buddha will make you
Buddha. Basically, you're forgetting these four points.
When we understand the
four points and know we
already have all these
Buddha qualities, we will
not get discouraged
during the path
So hearing, contemplating, meditating and having aspiration to these four points
is really important, even to have firm bodhicitta to begin with. The fact is that we
have this Buddha element, this Buddha-nature, and even people like us can get
all these Buddha qualities that we have talked about. And more than that, we
have them all already. We have all these Buddha qualities and manifestations,
not one less. When you understand this you will have the motivation to enter the
Mahayana path. You will not get tired or discouraged during the Mahayana path,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
272



so you'll be diligent. And without effort, almost automatically, you will look for
methods that will remind you of these four points and then meditate upon them.
Understanding these four points is the only method that will ensure a Bodhisattva
doesn't give up.
38
དེ་ནི་རྟག་ཏུ་ཉེར་གནས་པས།
}
རྒྱལ་བའི་སྲས་པོ་ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག །
བསོད་ནམས་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་རྫོགས་དང་
། །
ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ་ཉིད་དུ་འགྱུར། །
As this is ever-present, the sons of the victors do not deviate and paramilas gathered by
virtue are perfected to become immaculate.
[Bodhicitta) being ever-present in them the heirs of the Victor will not fall back. The
perfection of merit will be refined until being transformed into total purity.
389
བསོད་ནམས་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལྔ། །
དེ་ལ་རྣམ་གསུམ་རྟོག་མེད་པས། །
དེ་རྫོགས་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ་ནི། །
དེ་ཡི་མི་མཐུན་ཕྱོགས་སྤང་ཕྱིར། །
Virtue, the first five paramitas, is brought to perfection by an absence of any triplistic
thought concerning them. They are completely purified by the removal of their
opposites.
Once these five perfections of merit are not ideated in threefold division, they will
become perfect and fully pure, as their opposite lacets are abandoned.
Having the four points
also becomes an aid to
accumulate merit and
wisdom
We're continuing from stanza 386. Having the four points, hearing,
,
contemplating, meditating and having aspiration to them not only ensures that a
Bodhisattva doesn't get discouraged during the path. It also becomes an aid to
generate all the accumulations of merit and wisdom.
389
སྦྱིན་བྱུང་བསོད་ནམས་སྦྱིན་པ་སྟེ། །
ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ལས་བྱུང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་ཡིན། །
བཟོད་དང་བསམ་གཏན་གཉིས་དག་ནི།
སྒོམ་བྱུང་བརྩོན་འགྲུས་ཀུན་ཏུ་འགྲོ། །
Virtue born of giving is generosity; of correct action, right conduct. Forbearance and
meditative stability are both born of meditation and joyous perseverance is for all a
companion.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
273



The merit of generosity arises from giving, that of moralily arises from moral conduct.
The two aspects of patience and meditative stability stem from meditation and diligence
accompanies all.
There are three kinds of
merít, accumulated
through generosity,
discipline and meditation
Three kinds of merit are explained here. Merit accumulated through generosity,
merit accumulated through discipline, and merit accumulated through patience
and meditation, which are combined together and referred to as 'merit
accumulated through meditation'. This is very similar to the beginning of the
ninth chapter in Shantideva's Bodhicharyavatara, where he explains why wisdom
is most important. Also at the end of almost each chapter in Chandrakirti's
Madhyamakavatara, he talks about the paramitas in a way that's very similar.
The only difference is the way they explain wisdom. In the Madhyamika, wisdom
means understanding emptiness. Here wisdom means understanding the four
points. Basically they mean the same thing.
In the Madhyamika,
wisdom is understanding
emptiness. Here it means
understanding the four
points. They mean the
same thing
390
འཁོར་གསུམ་རྣམ་པར་རྟོག་པ་གང་། །
དེ་ནི་ཤེས་བྱའི་སྒྲིབ་པར་འདོད། །
སེར་སྣ་ལ་སོགས་རྣམ་རྟོག་གང་
།། !
ནི ཉོན་མོངས་ སྒྲིབ་པར་འདོད། །
"Triplistic thoughts" are considered to be the cognitive obscuration; avaricious
thoughts, and the like, as the defilement obscuration.
Whatever ideates in terms of the three circles is viewed as the veil of the hindrances to
knowledge. Whatever is the impulse of avarice and so on is to be regarded as the veil
of the mental poisons.
Two obscurations need to
be defeated: defilements
and cognitive
obscurations (having
concepts of agent, action
and object)
Two kinds of obscurations need to be defeated. The first kind of obscuration is
the defilements, such as passion, aggression and ignorance. The second kind is
the cognitive obscurations, which are basically having conceptions towards
agent, action and object (which are sometimes referred to as the 'three spheres'
or 'three circles' of action). In this case, you may not necessarily have any
negative emotions such as desire, greed or aggression, but you still have
distinctions of agent, action and object. In other words you still have extremes
or dualistic distinctions. This is the obstruction to omniscience, which is the
defilement that Bodhisattvas try to defeat. Even after you have destroyed or
discontinued samsara, you can still have that obscuration.
391
ཤེས་རབ་ལས་གཞན་དེ་དག་ནི། །
སྤོང་རྒྱུ་གཞན་མེད་དེ་ཡི་ཕྱིར། །
ཤེས་རབ་མཆོག་ཡིན་དེ་བཞི་ནི། །
ཐོས་པས་དེ་ཕྱིར་ཐོས་པ་མཆོག ། !
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
274



Other than prajña, there is no means for removing these; therefore prajña is the best of
all the paramitas. Its basis is such study; thus that study is supreme.
Since apart from discriminative wisdom there is no other cause to remove these /veils).
this discriminative wisdom is supreme. Its ground being study, such study is supreme.
The only way to destroy
the two obscurations is to
have wisdom, and the
only way to obtain that is
by having motivation and
aspiration to the four
points. So we should hear
them again and again
Well, this is one thing that we can do and we should do. The only way to destroy
the two obscurations is to have the wisdom of understanding emptiness, which is
the wisdom of understanding the selflessness of phenomena and the selflessness
of the person. And the only way to obtain that is by having motivation and
aspiration towards the four points, and the only way to begin is by hearing them.
So you should hear them, again and again. As Maitreya says, the wisdom of
hearing is really the most supreme.
Story of how Buddha was
a Bodhisattva who jumped
into a fire for just one
stanza of wisdom
There's a story of when Shakyamuni Buddha was a Bodhisattva, and he wanted to
hear one stanza of wisdom. The master asked him to jump into a fire, and he
said he would do it. I think he did it. This story says a lot. All he wanted was to
hear this wisdom, and nothing more. He wasn't going to write about it, because
he was going to jump into the fire and die. There's no agenda, no publishing.
And he wasn't going to listen to this so that in the future he could brag that he
had the only living wisdom lineage, the kind of thing that we see a lot these days
in Buddhist magazines! This Bodhisattva just wanted to hear, that's all. That's
an amazing motivation.
The qualities and
activities of past masters
such as Gampopa
Milarepa, jagôn
Kongtrül, Jamyang
Khyentse, and HH Dilgo
Khyentse Rinpoche
In my lifetime, I was fortunate enough to experience this with HH Dilgo Khyentse
Rinpoche. Unfortunately, when I talk about the greatness of the qualities of His
Holiness, people don't believe me. They think I'm exaggerating, or think I'm
being prejudiced or lenient, saying these things just because I like him. And
that's really frustrating! And I'm only talking from my own small and limited
capacity and point of view. When you read about the deeds and activities of the
past masters like Gampopa, Milarepa, Jamgön Kongtrül and Jamyang Khyentse,
you wonder how they managed to do everything that they claimed to have done.
But when you see beings like HH Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, you can convince
yourself, yes, this must have happened. But if you tell other people, they think
it's just a legend. Unfortunately, I think HH Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche's actions
and activity will become a legend. I call it 'unfortunate', because people don't
believe legends.
Story of HH Dilgo
Khyentse Rinpoche
receiving teachings in
Chengdu in the 1990s
Anyway, His Holiness was basically overflowing with teachings, with Dharma and
wisdom. Even in his last days, he would teach whenever there was a chance. Of
course, we know he taught right until the end, and maybe that's not surprising.
But he also listened and received teachings right until the end. From every
aspect that's unthinkable! Although he knew everything, that's for sure, his
longing and appreciation for the Dharma was so great that he always managed to
find someone who had certain teachings or transmissions that he claimed he
didn't have. And he would find many of these people in the midst of nowhere.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
275



remember when we were in Chengdu in China in the 1990s, when things were
still quite tight and there weren't many Buddhists. His Holiness was always doing
something like pujas or giving initiations. But we were in Chengdu, so who
would receive teachings? Not many people! And one day he asked us to come to
the hotel, and there was a really filthy looking monk about to open a book, and
His Holiness asked all of us to sit down and listen. And he said that it was a
certain transmission that was about to go extinct and we should all receive it.
And that's how we spent our time for the next two days!
Story of HH Dilgo
Khyentse Rinpoche giving
teachings in Nepal to the
young tulkus and
Rinpoches
His emphasis on listening to the teachings, just hearing the sound of the
teachings, was incredible. When he gave big teachings in Nepal, there would be
so many young tulkus and Rinpoches, sometimes 70 or 80 of them, and many of
them like me were very wild. We did not appreciate the teachings, and many of
us would just go to town and come back late and miss things in between. But
His Holiness would somehow know all the page numbers of who had missed
what. I know this clearly, because I was usually asked by His Holiness, can you
read that to him, because I think he missed these two pages". I used to get so
cross with these young lamas, as I always had to read these extras! He cared so
much about who had missed what. His Holiness was generally very gentle, and
he would never raise his voice or anything like that. He was diligent for us
basically. He put so much emphasis on hearing. There was almost a whole
enterprise happening during the teachings. We could write and we would send
people to buy momos and books, or sew people's robes together, and His
Holiness also knew all this, but as long as we were not falling asleep and not
listening, it was fine.
His great emphasis on
hearing the teachings
I guess as Maitreya says, as a good beginning just hearing is the most important.
And even now, even though these guys (Tulku Pema Wangyal Rinpoche and Tulku
Jigme Khyentse Rinpoche) have heard this so many times, they're still here. They
probably know these things back to front, but instead of relaxing in the morning
and then watching a good football match on television, they're here. I guess one
thing we can learn from this is that we are keeping alive this tradition of placing
importance on listening. And many of you have sacrificed many other things to
come here. I suppose that although it's coming from my mouth, at least it's sort
of related to Maitreya's words. It's like the dog's tooth that we talked about
yesterday. I guess there must at least be some benefit.
Day 10
Introduction
What is the essence of
form?
One of the most powerful phenomena that we experience is form. Form comes
right at the beginning of the five aggregates. And, especially for this realm, form
is where we affix labels. It's also one of the most powerful phenomena that we
get attracted to and revolted by. So form is a very important phenomenon. You
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
276



might ask what is the essence of form? What is form made out of? And if you
ask people nowadays, scientists or whoever, then they might come up with
things like matter, substance, atoms, particles and so on, down to the smallest
entities. Their answer is that form is made out of particles. Or I guess you can
say form is particles.
Buddhists will answer that
form is Vairocana Buddha
If you ask the same question to a Buddhist, maybe a Mahayana or Vajrayana
Buddhist, then the answer is that form is Vairocana Buddha. They don't have
concepts such as atoms, particles and all that. They say it's Vairocana Buddha.
Then you ask them, who is this Vairocana Buddha, how big is it and all that? And
instead of saying that it's something very small, they say it's very, very big. It's
everywhere. They will say it's so big that it has filled up the whole of space.
A description of the
universes in the 13th lotus
held by Vairocana Buddha
Out of curiosity you ask more questions, because you want to know about this
Vairocana Buddha. And the description continues. He sets in the meditation
mudra, they say. Resting on his hand is a big begging bowl, very big. On the top
of the begging bowl are 25 lotuses. And counting upwards to the thirteenth
lotus, within that lotus there are millions and billions of universes. And each of
these universes also has lots of planets. Some are as big as thumbnail, and
others are a hundred times bigger than our own planet. Some have no beings.
Some have beings like us. Some have only Buddhas. Some have only
Bodhisattvas on the eighth bhumi. And they all have different colours, shapes,
languages, and completely different forms. Some of these beings look like a
wheel, some look like an axe, some look like a lotus, and some look like a sword.
There are all kinds of beings. And there's one small planet called "Fearless
Planet", and that's where we are.
Each of Vairocana
Buddha's pores holds the
complete set of universes,
without Vairocana
becoming bigger or the
universes becoming
smaller
Now you are getting very curious about this and you ask for more. And they say
that each pore of this Vairocana Buddha contains the complete set of universes
and planets that I have just described. But although each complete set is as big
as the original, Vairocana Buddha has not become bigger, even though each set
is completely contained inside a single one of his pores. I'm trying to answer
some of your questions related to the 32 major marks, especially for those of you
who are pondering elephant dreams.
This is inconceivable.
That doesn't mean
thinking is disallowed, but
nor is it encouraged.
When we have been talking about Buddha-nature, we have been talking about
inconceivable things. Now it's very important to understand that when we talk
about 'inconceivable', it doesn't mean that you're not allowed to think. But
equally important, neither does it mean that you're encouraged or have a duty to
think. It means that you have no choice except to think. If you want to wake up
from a nightmare of an elephant raping you, you have to accept that you are
dreaming. There won't be any waking up from the nightmare if the elephant is
not raping you. So in order to wake someone who is having such a nightmare,
whether you use small methods such as tickling them or pinching their toes, or
larger methods such as a cold bucket of water, none of these is discouraged.
Many methods can be
used to wake someone
from a nightmare
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
277



But a bucket of cold water
doesn't cause the dream-
elephant to run away, as
there wasn't any elephant
to begin with
But when we say we do not discourage these methods, it doesn't mean that the
bucket of cold water is a cause of the elephant running away. It didn't cause the
elephant to run away, as there wasn't any elephant to begin with. Likewise, we
are being raped by lots of elephants all the time. So if you want to talk about
stopping that, you have to accept that you are dreaming. Thinking is there
already, and thinking is not discouraged. In fact, that's the only thing that we
can do. And manipulating this thinking is our path. So some of us have to think
with love and compassion, some with bodhicitta, and some with emptiness. For
others, we have to think in terms of moral conduct, a few petty morals and
ethics, and doing the right thing. That's how we have to begin.
We already have thinking,
and it's not discouraged
as it's all we can do. So
our path is to manipulate
this thinking. That's how
we have to begin
Thinking is not
discouraged, but we must
not forget the Buddha is
unthinkable
Thinking is not discouraged, and at the same time you must not forget that the
Buddha is unthinkable. So when we talk about the sambhogakaya Buddha's lock
of hair, or whichever parts of his body you are having a problem with or
imagination about, we cannot imagine it as our only reference for so-called hair
is what we have on the top of our head or maybe on our chest. The world has
become so small now. It used to be the case that when Tibetans first saw blonde
hair, they could not believe it. They wondered what it was. And that's quite
strange actually, because most of these Vajrayana practitioners visualise deities
with red or blonde hair in their practice. But when they actually saw one, they
couldn't believe it. They didn't know how to relate to it.
Another example of
inconceivability:
Nagarjuna's Praise to
Mahakali
We just don't know what the sambhogakaya's lock of hair looks like. It's just
inconceivable. For all we know, each lock of his hair could look like the
Mississippi River. Nagarjuna's Praise to Mahakali can tell us a lot. She is
considered a protector who can remove obstacles, and he prays to her to sniff in
the obstacles, the demons. And once they are inside her nose, it's so vast that
the demons don't know how to come out. Some of the demons are still trying to
get out of her nostrils! Basically, the 32 major marks are beyond us, even the
outermost 32 major marks that are described here, such as that antelope-like
calves and things like that. These Bodhisattvas are trying to describe something
that is indescribable. They are very compassionate, that's all that I can say. So
now we come to the conclusion, the big conclusion,
The 32 major marks are
beyond us. With great
compassion, the
Bodhisattvas are trying to
describe something that
is indescribable
392
དེ་ལྟར་ཡིད་ཆེས་ལུང་དང་རིགས་པ་ལ། 1
བརྟེན་ནས་བདག་ཉིད་འབའ་ཞིག་དག་ཕྱིར་དང་།
གང་དག་མོས་དགེ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་ལྡན་བློ་
། །
དེ་དག་རྗེས་སུ་གཟུང་ཕྱིར་འདི་བཤད་དོ། །
Thus, on the basis of the trustworthy words of Lord Buddha and that of reason, have i
given this teaching in order to purify myself alone and further to nurture intelligent
beings-those having perfect faith and virtue.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
278



Based on the trustworthy words of the Buddha and on scriptures of logic, I have
explained this for the sole purpose of purifying myself and supporting all those whose
understanding has the best of virtue and devotion.
393
ཇི་ལྟར་སྐྱོན་གློག་ནོར་བུ་ཉི་མ་ལ། །
བརྟེན་ནས་མིག་དང་ལྡན་པ་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན། །
དེ་བཞིན་དོན་ཚིག་ཆོས་སྤོབས་འོད་མཛད་པ། ། |
ཐུབ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་འདི་ཉིད་རབ་ཏུ་བཤད། །
just as, when aided by a lamp, lightning, a gem, the sun or the moon, those with eyes
can see, so like wise, by relying on the great sage, who light of meanings, terms,
Dharma and dharani radiated, have I now properly expounded this.
As someone with eyes sees by relying on a lamp, or on lightening, a jewel, the sun or
the moon, this has been truly explained by relying on the Muni, brilliant in meaning,
words, phenomena and power.
The sutras that are the
basis for Maitreya's text
Maitreya has not just
relied on blind faith, but
also on proper analysis
and the yogi's direct
cognition
Here Maitreya is indicating that this is not just something he fabricated, but that
it actually came from many sutras, including: the Sutra of Great Compassion,
which I think has been translated into Chinese, the Sutra Which Explains
Altruism, the Jñanaloka-alamkara-sutra, the Dashabhumika-sutra, and the
Avatamsaka-sutra, which I think has also been translated into Chinese and other
languages. Also the Prajnaparamita-sutra, the Sutra of the Treasury of the Sky,
the Sutra Requested by Matisagara (a Bodhisattva), the Abhidharma-sutra, the
Sutra where Buddha taught Buddha Nature, the Sutra of Ratnaketu, and the
Mahaparinirvana-sutra. These are the sutras that Maitreya has relied on or
extracted from. And he has not only relied on the words of the Buddha with
blind faith, but he has also relied on proper analysis and also the yogi's direct
cognition. And he has explained this mainly to liberate and purify himself,
meaning Maitreya. When he says 'mainly', we shouldn't understand this to mean
that he is a Bodhisattva who thinks only about himself, but rather that he's
showing humility. He's indicating that he does not want to say this is good for
everyone, but rather that it's mainly for himself and people like him, to purify
their defilements and obscurations. And it's also for those who have Mahayana
aspirations and motivations. He has spoken this for them.
Maitreya has written this
mainly to purify and
liberate himself and
others with aspiration
towards the Mahayana
He has explained this with
outer causes such as the
words of the Buddha and
inner causes such as
analytical wisdom
We have the ability to see things with the help of outer causes like a lamp, the
sun, a jewel or the moon, and with inner causes such as the eye consciousness.
Similarly, he has explained this with outer causes such as the words of the
Buddha and inner causes such as analytical wisdom. And these words come from
the Buddha who has attained the unmoveable and inconceivable qualities that we
have been talking about.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
279



394
གང་ཞིག་དོན་ལྡན་ཆོས་དང་ཉེར་འབྲེལ་ཞིང་། །
ཁམས་གསུམ་ཀུན་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་སྤོང་བྱེད་གསུང་། །
ཞི་བའི་ཕན་ཡོན་སྟོན་པར་མཛད་པ་གང་། |
དེ་ནི་དྲང་སྲོང་གསུང་ཡིན་བཟློག་པ་གཞན། ། |
Whatever has significance, is well-connected with Dharma, is a teaching which
removes all the three worlds' defilement and shows peace's benefit: such is the sage of
truth's teaching. What is contrary to this is something other.
Whatever speech is meaningful and well connected with Dharma, which removes all
afflictions of the three realms and shows the benefit of the fattainment/ of peace, is the
speech of the Sage, while any different speech is other.
395
1
གང་ཞིག་རྒྱལ་བའི་བསྟན་པ་འབའ་ཞིག་གི། །
དབང་བྱས་རྣམ་གཡེང་མེད་ཡིད་ཅན་གྱིས་བཤད།
ཐར་པ་ཐོབ་པའི་ལམ་དང་རྗེས་མཐུན་པར། ?
དེ་ཡང་དྲང་སྲོང་བཀའ་བཞིན་སྤྱི་བོས་བླང་། །
Whatever those of perfectly-undistraçled mind have expounded, solely in accordance
with the teachings of the victorious one, and which is conducive to the path for
attaining liberation, should also be placed on the head-like the Buddha's own speech.
Whatever someone has explained with undistracted mind, exclusively in the light of the
Victor's teaching, and conductive to the path of attaining release, one should place on
one's head as the words of the Sage.
What constitutes the
Buddha's words and what
constitutes a shastra
The Buddha's words have
a greater meaning, no
stains, and the purpose to
lead beings to absolute
peace
As supplementary information, Maitreya describes what constitutes the Buddha's
word, and what constitutes a commentary or shastra. The characteristics of the
Buddha's words are as follows. They are words that have greater meaning, and
their purpose is not just to satisfy passing intellectual curiosity, but for a great
meaning such as enlightenment. The words themselves are without any stains or
limitations of skilful means and wisdom. And the purpose of these words is to
dispel all the obscurations and lead beings to absolute peace beyond fabrications
and beyond pain. The words of the Buddha have these characteristics, otherwise
they are not considered the words of the Buddha.
A shastra has the sole
intention of explaining
the Buddha's words, an
undistracted author, and
the ability to indirectly
lead you to enlightenment
And what constitutes a shastra or commentary on the Buddha's words is that its
sole intention is to explain the words of the Buddha, and not to answer such
questions as whether crows have teeth or not. And although the author of a
shastra doesn't have the eighteen uncommon qualities, four fearlessnesses and
all that, it's important that at least he has not been distracted. And if the result
indirectly helps to lead you to enlightenment, then that is a shastra, and it should
also be revered as the words of the Sage. Now he offers some advice.
It should also be revered
as the words of the Sage
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
280



396
གང་ཕྱིར་རྒྱལ་ལས་ཆོས་མཁས་འགའ་ཡང་འཇིག་རྟེན་འདི་ན་ཡོད་མིན་ཏེ། །
མ་ལུས་དེ་ཉིད་མཆོག་ནི་ཚུལ་བཞིན་ཀུན་མཁྱེན་གྱིས་མཁྱེན་གཞན་མིན་པ། ། |
དེ་ཕྱིར་དྲང་སྲོང་རང་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་གཞག་མདོ་སྡེ་གང་ཡིན་དེ་མི་དཀྲུག །
ཐུབ་ཚུལ་བཤིག་ཕྱིར་དེ་ཡང་དམ་ཆོས་ལ་ནི་གནོད་པ་བྱེད་པར་འགྱུར། །
Since no one in this world has more Dharma skill than the Buddha, the omniscient one
who properly knows all without exception as being the supreme suchness, which others
know not, then whatever sutras were expounded by the great sage himself should not
be adulterated; such would harm the true Dharma through destruction of the way of the
mighty victor
There is no one in this world more skilled in Dharma that the Victor. No other has such
inisight, knowing everything without exception (and knowing supreme thatness the way
it is. Thus one should not distort the sutras presented by the Sage himself, since this
would destroy the Muni's manner of teaching and furthermore cause harm to the
sacred Dharma.
397
ཉོན་མོངས་རྨོངས་བདག་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་འཕགས་ལ་སྐུར་བ་དང་། །
དེས་གསུངས་ཆོས་ལ་བརྙས་གང་དེ་ཀུན་ཞེན་ལྟས་བྱས། །
དེས་ན་ཞེན༣འིདྲི་ཅན་དེ་ལ་བློ་མི་སྐུར། །
གོས་གཙང་ཚོན་གྱིས་རྣམ་འགྱུར་སྙམ་གྱིས་གོས་པ་ མིན་
Those who, through defilement, are by their nature ignorant, revile the deeply-realized
and despise their teachings; all that occurs due to opinionatedness. Therefore the mind
should never in the impure prison of fixed views be confined. Clean cloth may be dyed
with colour; never cloth with oil-stains.
Those blinded by poisons (and possessed off the nature of ignorance revile the noble
ones and despise the teachings they have spoken. Since all this stems from a fixated
view, mind should not be joined with polluted vision. Clean cloth is totally transformed
by colour, but never is cloth (to be treated with oil.
Some advice: it's very
important not to
misinterpret the Buddha's
words with an intellectual
mind, as that will
dismantle his words and
harm the Dharma
If you criticise sublime
beings or despise their
words, you have strong
fixation towards wrong
views
This is very important advice. It's very important not to misinterpret or
manipulate the words of the Buddha with an intellectual mind, because nobody is
more learned about phenomena than the Buddha. He is the only one who knows
things as they are and things as they appear. What is the downfall of
manipulating the words of the Buddha? If you manipulate the words of the
Buddha then you will dismantle the words of the Buddha, and that way you will
harm the Dharma. When beings with defilements and obscurations criticise
sublime beings or despise the words of the sublime beings, this all comes from
having a strong fixation towards a wrong view. So it is important not to get
fixated on one's own wrong view, because if you have even a slight wrong view,
then it is very difficult to let your mind soak in the Dharma. It will be very
difficult for you to understand the Dharma. In fact, having a wrong view is
actually considered even more dangerous than being a beginner and not having
any view at all. He gives the example that if you want to dye a fabric, then if the
If you have wrong views,
it will be very difficult for
you to understand the
dharma, like it is difficult
to dye an oil-stained
fabric
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
281



fabric has even a small oil stain, then it will be very difficult to dye it. So how do
these wrong views creep in to people like us?
398
བློ་དམན་ཕྱིར་དང་དཀར་མོས་བྲལ་ཕྱིར་ལོག་པའི་ང་རྒྱལ་ལ་བརྟེན་ཕྱིར། །
དམ་ཆོས་ཕོངས་པས་བསྒྲིབས་པའི་བདག་ཕྱིར་དྲང་དོན་དེ་ཉིད་ངེས་འཛིན་ཕྱིར། །
རྙེད་ལ་བརྐམ་ཕྱིར་ལྟ་བའི་དབང་ཕྱིར་ཆོས་སུན་འབྱིན་པ་བརྟེན་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
ཆོས་འཛིན་བསྲིངས་ཕྱིར་མོས་པ་དམན་ཕྱིར་དགྲ་བཅོམ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་སྤོང་བྱེད། 1
Through inferior understanding, absence of aspiration to virtue, indulging in wrong
pride, a nature veiled by neglecting Dharma, mistaking the expedient meaning or the
absolute-thatness, greed's thirst, ideology's grip, the influence of truth despisers, staying
away from those holding the teachings and lower aspiration - thus is the doctrine of
"those who defeat the enemy" abandoned.
Due to a feeble intellect, lack of striving for virtue, reliance on false pride, a nature
obscured by neglect of pure Dharma, taking the provisional for the definitive meaning.
for thatness, craving for profit, being under the sway of finferior) views, relying on those
disapproving lof Dharma), staying away from those who uphold the teachings, and due
to mean devotion, the teachings of the Foe-Vanquishers are abandoned.
A list of the causes and
origins of wrong views
He lists several causes here. Having an inferior or weak intellect that is not
accompanied by strength or confidence. Having a habit of not liking virtuous
actions. Almost disliking them. We're not talking about not doing virtuous
actions. Most of us don't do them, but at least we know they are the right thing
to do or a good thing to do, although we can't do them. That is really important.
Some people actually think it's the wrong thing to do. Another cause is when
one is full of pride, so that even if one wants to learn, one is only interested in
the words and not their meaning. So one looks for a master who is good with
words and not with meaning. And if one is deprived of spiritual wealth, Dharma
wealth, then there are lots of obscurations. And if one is inclined to stubbornly
think that teachings of expedient meaning are certain teachings, teachings of
definitive meanings. And if one is under the influence of wrong views. We
shouldn't think that this doesn't come easily! These things can come very easily,
especially wrong views. It's much easier than killing a human being, and yet
having a wrong view is supposedly the worst. And associating with people who
distract you from the Dharma. And if one is distant from a spiritual companion
who gives you an enlightened influence. And not having a great motivation.
With these, you end up abandoning the Dharma. And that is really not good!
Wrong views can come so
easily, much more easily
than killing a person, and
yet wrong views are
supposedly the worst
399
ཇི་ལྟར་ཟབ་མོའི་ཆོས་ཉམས་དེ་བཞིན་མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་མེ་དང་ནི། 1
མི་བཟད་སྦྲུལ་གདུག་གཤེད་མ་དང་ནི་ཐོག་ལའང་ཤིན་ཏུ་འཇིགས་མི་བྱ། །
མེ་སྦྲུལ་དགྲ་དང་རྡོ་རྗེའི་མེས་ནི་སྲོག་དང་བྲལ་བ་ཙམ་བྱེད་དེ། །
དེ་ལས་མནར་མེད་རྣམས་ཀྱི་འགྲོ་བ་ཤིན་ཏུ་འཇིགས་པར་འགྲོ་མི་འགྱུར། །
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
282



More than fire, cruel poisonous snakes, murderers and lightning, should the wise fear
the loss of these profound teachings. Fire, snakes, enemies and thunderbolts only bring
life to an end - they do not take one to the so-frightful state of worst torment.
Skilful beings must not be as deeply afraid of fire and cruel poisonous snakes, of
murderers or lightning, as they should be of the loss of the profound Dharma. Fire,
snakes, enemies and thunderbolts can only separate us from this life, but cannot take
us to the utterly fearful states of (the hells of direst pain.
You can be burned by
fire, bitten by a poisonous
snake, killed by a butcher
or struck by lightning, but
they will not throw you to
the hell realms, unlike
abandoning the Dharma
Here Maitreya is saying you can be burned by fire, bitten by a poisonous snake,
killed by a merciless butcher, or be struck by thunder and lightning. But you
shouldn't really be afraid of those things, because the most they can do is
separate you from this life. They have no power to throw you to the hell realm.
Whereas by abandoning the Dharma, you are opening the door to the endless
pain of the hell realms and other lower realms.
400
གང་ཞིག་ཡང་ཡང་
ང་སྡིག་གྲོགས་བསྟེན་པས་སངས་རྒྱས་ངན་སེམས་ལྡན་གྱུར་དང་
།།
ཕ་མ་དགྲ་བཅོམ་གསོད་པར་བྱ་བ་མིན་བྱེད་མཆོག་ཚོགས་འབྱེད་པའི་མི། ། !
དེ་ཡང་ཆོས་ཉིད་ངེས་པར་བསམས་ན་མྱུར་དུ་དེ་ལས་ཐར་འགྱུར་གྱི། །
གང་ཞིག་ཡིད་ནི་ཆོས་ལ་སྣང་བ་དེ་ལ་ཐར་པ་ག་ལ་ཡོད། །
Even one who, through repeated association with sinful friends, has had harmful
intentions towards the Buddha or who commits the most heinous acts of killing father,
mother or an Arhat or who created divisions in the noble Sangha will be quickly rid of
such things upon sincere reflection about this true nature - how could there be
liberation for one whose mind hates Dharma!
Even someone who has relied on evil friends again and again and thus heeded harmful
intentions towards a Buddha, who has committed one of the most heinous acts - killing
his father, mother or an Arhat, or splitting the sublime Assembly will be quickly
released from these, once genuinely reflecting the Dharmata. But where would
liberation be for someone whose mind is hostile to Dharma?
Even the worst negative
actions can be purified,
but if you abandon the
Dharma then you are
abandoning the very path,
so nothing can save you
Someone under the influence of non-virtuous friends might kill a Buddha or
make him bleed. They could kill their father or mother, kill an Arhat, or make
divisions within the great Sangha. This refers to the Buddha's Sangha, so the real
division of the Sangha could only happen during the Buddha's time. And apart
from killing the Buddha, all this has happened. And some people definitely had
the motivation to kill him, like King Ajatashastru, who did some of these things
with the help of Devadatta. But even if someone has done these things, if they
have motivation and they practice the true essence of all phenomena, or the four
points that we talked about yesterday, they can still achieve liberation. Non-
virtuous actions such as making the Buddha's body bleed and killing your own
father and mother create so much negative karma, but they can still be purified.
But if you abandon the Dharma, what hope is there? Then the very path is
abandoned, so nothing can save you. Now we come to the dedication.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
283



401
དཀོན་མཆོག་རྣམ་པར་བྱུང་ཁམས་དྲི་མེད་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཡོན་ཏན་ཕྲིན་ལས་ཏེ། །
དོན་གནས་རྣམ་བདུན་ཚུལ་བཞིན་བཤད་ལས་བདག་གིས་དགེ་བ་གང་ཐོབ་པ། །
དེས་ནི་འགྲོ་འདི་མཐའ་ཡས་འོད་མངའ་དྲང་སྲོང་ཚེ་དཔག་མེད་མཐོང་ཞིང་
།།
མཐོང་ནས་ཀྱང་ནི་ཆོས་མིག་དྲི་མེད་སྐྱེས་ཏེ་བྱང་ཆུབ་མཆོག་ཐོབ་ཤོག །
Whatever virtue I obtain through having properly explained these seven points - the
jewels, the perfectly-pure essence, immaculate enlightenment, its qualities and Buddha-
activity, through it may beings see the sage of boundless life, he endowed with limitless
light; having seen him, once their stainless Dharma eyes are opened, may they then
achieve supreme enlightenment.
Having properly explained the seven (vajral points of the jewels, the utterly pure
element, flawless enlightenment, qualities and activity, may any virtue / harvest from
this lead all sentient beings to see the Lord of Boundless Life who is endowed with
Infinite Light Upon seeing, may their stainless Dharma-eye open and may they reach
highest enlightenment.
We have been talking about seven vajra points: (1-3) the Three Jewels, (4) the
enlightened element (kham) that is primordially pure, (5) the state of
enlightenment where temporary defilements have been removed, (6) the quality
of this enlightenment, and (7) its activity or manifestations.
Dedication of merit
1, Maitreya, I dedicate whatever merit there is by explaining these seven vajra
points so all sentient beings may see the Sage of Boundless Life, whose life
cannot be measured, who has reached the deathless state. May sentient beings
see this Buddha, and upon seeing the Buddha, receive his teachings. And after
receiving teachings, may they open their Dharma eyes, gradually follow the entire
path and attain enlightenment. And that's the dedication.
.
402
གང་ལས་རྒྱུ་མཚན་གང་གི་ཕྱིར། །
ཇི་ལྟ་བུར་ནི་གང་བཤད་དང་། །
རྒྱུ་མཐུན་ནི་གང་ཡིན་ཏེ། །
ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ་བཞིས་བསྟན་ཏོ། །
On what basis, for which reason, in which way, that which has been explained and
those factors favourable, these have been taught by means of stanzas four.
On what basis, for what reason and in what way {this has been given), what it explains
and what cause is conductive {to understanding it have been taught by means of four
stanzas
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
284



403
གཉིས་ཀྱི་བདག་ཉིད་དག་པ་ཡི། །
ཐབས་དང་གཅིག་གིས་ཉམས་པའི་རྒྱུ། །
དེ་ནས་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པ་ནི། །
གཉིས་ཀྱིས་འབྲས་བུ་བསྟན་པ་ཡིན། །
Two have shown the means for purifying oneself, then the causes for the loss and,
through stanzas two, an explanation of the fruit.
Two stanzas [show] the means to purify oneself and one shows the cause of
deterioration. Thereupon, by means of two further stanzas the fruit sprung from
deterioration is explained.
404
འཁོར་གྱི་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་བཟོད་པ་དང་
། །
བྱང་ཆུབ་ཐོབ་པའི་ཆོས་བརྗོད་པའི། །
མདོར་ན་འབྲས་བུ་རྣམ་གཉིས་ནི། །
ཐ་མ་ཡིས་ནི་བསྟན་པ་ཡིན།། །།
in brief, the twofold fruit has been explained in what is said in the last; the surrounding
mandala, forbearance and the attainment of enlightenment.
(Being born in the mandala of a Buddha's retinue, attaining patience and then
enlightenment: expressing these qualities, the two aspects of fruit are explained by the
last in a summarized way.
Conclusion
This is just the explanation of everything that has been taught, a summary of the
conclusion. The first four stanzas talk about the cause, the next two stanzas talk
about the means to purify oneself, and the next stanza talks about the cause of
how one gets degenerated. And then the next two stanzas explain the result of
being degenerated. And the last one talks about being able to bear the truth.
It's such a beautiful word. We can't bear the truth, so we're always looking for
something fake. So, the last one talks about bearing the truth and ultimately
obtaining enlightenment.
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུད་བླ་
མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་དཀོན་མཆོག་གི་རིགས་རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་བ་ལས།
ཕན་ཡོན་གྱི་སྐབས་ཏེ་ལྔ་པའོ།།
This was the fifth chapter, on the benefits, from the Analysis of the Potential for the Rare
and Sublime in this "Ultimate Mahayana Treatise on the Changeless Continuity".
This was the section "Benefit," the fifth chapter of The Commentary on the Highest
Continuity of the Mahayana Dharma which Analyzes the Disposition of the Rare and
the Sublime Ones.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
285



This means that the gyü lama, the Mahayana-Uttaratantra-Shastra written by
Maitreya has been completed.
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་མགོན་པོ་བྱམས་པས་མཛད་པ་རྫོགས་སོ།། 11
དཔལ་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དཔེ་མེད་ཀྱི་མཁས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བྲམ་ཟེ་རིན་ཆེན་རྡོ་རྗེའི་དཔོན་པོ་པཎྜི་ཏ་མཁས་པ་ཆེན་པོ་སད་
ཛྙཱ་ན་དང་། ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་ཤཱ་ཀྱའི་དགེ་སློང་བློ་ལྡན་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱིས་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དཔེ་མེད་དུ་བསྒྱུར་བའོ།། །
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱིས་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དཔེ་མེད་དུ་ བསྒྱུར་བའོ།། །།
Translated from the Indian by the great pandita and scholar Sadzana, grandson of the
Brahmin Ratnavajra, great scholar of the “Incomparable City of Glory" (Srinagar) and by
the Tibetan translator, the Sakya monk Loden Sherab, in that "Incomparable City of
Glory".
Translators
This was translated by a pandita and scholar called Sadzana, grandson of the
Brahmin called Ratnavajra. He was from Kashmir and this is what they used to do
in Kashmir, translate books like this! And the translator from the Tibetan side
was the monk Loden Sherab. I think he was the cousin of Legpe Sherab,
someone who spent about 17 years in India. We should offer incredible gratitude
to these translators for what they have done, and also incredible gratitude to the
present-day translators and Dharma patrons.
Now we will celebrate this occasion of discussing this very special Mahayana
shastra. I wonder how much merit we have generated through my explanations,
but if there is any, it's worthwhile to celebrate. So as a gesture of celebration,
we're going to take refuge and the Bodhisattva vow. I will also do it myself
together with you guys. So we'll have a short break, so you can go and catch
your trains, and for those who don't really want to take refuge, this is the time to
sneak out.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra - 2004
Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
286



Questions & Answers
The Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
Do animals have Buddha-nature?
[Q] So how do we prove that an animate being such as a dog or cat has the
element?
(A] There are three reasons: (1) because a sentient being can manifest as the
Buddha, by practicing the path and all of that. (2) Because in the ultimate realm,
they are equal. Maybe we should say they are equally emptiness. (3) They have
rig, dualistic mind.
[Q] But a dog can't practice the path
(A) Not now, perhaps. But there was a merchant, called Palché I think, who
accidentally went around a stupa when he was a pig.
[Q] But this doesn't prove that a dog or cat has the element.
[A] What would qualify for you as a proof, can you tell me?
[Q] Well, here you have a dog, apparently faithful but a little bit stupid. How can I
know that this dog or cat has the element?
[A] I'd like to know why it doesn't have, according to you. What makes you think
that? Is it just because the dog is stupid?
[Q] The first reason - that you can practice. A dog or a cat can't.
[A] Yes, but this is Mahayana. You're slightly stained by the Vajrayana, which
talks about reaching enlightenment this life and all that. In the Mahayana, you
have three countless eons! This life a dog, next life a pig, five hundred lives as a
bird, and so on.
[Q] So as a pig or as a dog, are there are things you can do, like walking around a
stupa, that qualify as practice?
(A) It's like the story of Lodrötenpa (Sthiramati). When Vasubandhu was reading
the Prajñaparamita, Lodrötenpa was just a pigeon, and he became a great
disciple afterwards. You're still not convinced? I think we touched this subject
when we talked about compassion during the Madhyamakavatara. A very
important cause of compassion is the knowledge of how to harm someone, as it
means that you're automatically avoiding that harm for yourself. And for now,
because you're driven by a certain aggression, you want that pain for others.
That's quite an important part of this kham or element.
Do plants and stones have Buddha-nature?
[Q] How do we prove that stone doesn't have a mind?
[A] That doesn't matter!
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
287



[Q] Why?
(A) It's not our burden. But basically there are two types of phenomena, one is
inanimate, one is animate. One particular stone might have mind, or it might
not. That doesn't matter. But anything that is animate has the element.
[Q] If there is a beautiful plant that nourishes sentient beings, does it set up the
karmic conditions for its eventual awakening, as compared to a plant that causes
harm to or poisons a sentient being?
[A] A plant?
[Q] Well, just like we imagine that an animal has the potential for Buddha-nature
because it responds to its environment, because a plant manifests characteristics
or qualities, it also is responsive to conditions.
[A] This is why I was saying earlier that inanimate things are a projection of your
mind.
[Q] But how do we define animate? That's also a projection.
[A] Yes. But for instance, if this tent were to fall on your head and perhaps even
kill you, we couldn't really say that the tent had the intention to kill you. I think
that a plant is also categorised in this department!
[Q] But then we should do the same with animals. How can I know that an animal
has intention? I project intention onto an animal just as i do onto a plant.
[A] With an animal, it's slightly broader, because I guess an animal has wishes.
Of course we don't know. When a dog wags its tail, we assume that this
indicates the dog likes you. It's an interpretation. But we never know. But we do
know that it doesn't want to suffer.
[Q] But scientists can also interpret, by using subtle tools of laboratory inquiry.
And they see that plants also respond.
(A) I cannot say that all plants don't have mind, although I'm also not saying that
they are beings. This is something that is beyond me. But in the Words of My
Perfect Teacher, Patrul Rinpoche writes that there are hell beings trapped in the
form of brooms, beams and so on. It's infinite. I cannot really say, but I have to
say that there are so-called inanimate phenomena in this world, and those
inanimate phenomena don't have rig, kham or family. If a plant has the kham,
then I guess you have to say that it has all these Buddha qualities.
[Q] We say that cognition is located in the brain. But especially for smaller
creatures where the brain is difficult to locate, science may admit that the mind
and all that defines the species is located in the DNA molecule. This would mean
that the true Buddha-nature is present in a DNA molecule, and even in a single
atom that is part of the molecule. Since plants also have DNA molecules, I feel
that we could eventually admit the presence of this nature within plants and
perhaps stones and as well.
[A] Let's sort this out once and for all! When we talk about kham, at the moment
we are talking about this special kind of kham, the rig kham, the Buddha-nature
kind of element. But usually kham is used to refer to the elements more
generally, the 18 dhatus. There are the six outer kham: form, sound, smell,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
288



taste, feeling, and phenomena. These are the outer elements, and they are
explained in detail if we study the abhidharma. Then there are six inner
elements: the eye, ear, nose etc., and in between there are the six types of
consciousness (namshey): the eye consciousness, ear consciousness etc. The
point here is that scientists are usually talking about the outer dhatus and even
among these, they don't usually talk about the dhatu of Dharma, as then they
would be talking about mind. But now we are talking about abhidharma, and all
phenomena that we can perceive exist within these 18 dhatus or kham. Some
phenomena have only one or two of these 18 elements. Some, like us, have all of
them. For instance, a stone might only have the form element. But even just the
form element is also divided into the five elements: earth, water, fire, air, and
space. So Buddhists also believe that a stone has many of these elements, for
example the fire element, the moisture element to hold it together, gravity and
so on. That all acceptable. And each of these dhatus has some kind of
movement, some kind of function. They're not permanent and unchanging. For
example, when the sun rises, the lotus opens. I don't know the detailed
explanation, but there must be some kind of communication between the fire
element, the moisture element and so on. But this kind of movement does not
mean that this phenomenon has all the 18 dhatus.
Scientists have discovered many things like DNA, and these are all totally
acceptable to Buddhists. But there is something that scientists haven't found yet,
which Vasubandhu and all the early Buddhist metaphysicists have found. There
are other types of phenomena that don't have most of the 18 dhatus, just one or
two. But instead of only having inanimate elements, they only have animate
elements, such as consciousness. This corresponds to certain god realms, where
they don't have form, colour, moisture or any of that. Similarly, bardo beings
don't necessarily have all 18 dhatus. They may only have one or two, but these
are typically the more 'animate' ones, the inner or 'in-between' dhatus. So if we
compare a phenomenon that has only one khamor dhatu, and a phenomenon
that has all the 18 kham, they are different. They function differently. We have
all 18 dhatus and the Buddha-nature, but to be referred to as 'animate', a being
only has to have the 12 ayatanas - the 12 inner and in-between dhatus or kham.
Let's say that a stone has the form element. As I said, form includes earth,
water, fire and all that. Now if one of these sub-elements is reduced, such as the
water element, then perhaps the stone will disintegrate. But this doesn't mean
that the stone has mind dhatu, the consciousness dhatu. This is what the
Buddhists would say. There is scientific support for this view too. For example,
the difference between chimpanzees and humans in terms of our DNA is very
small - we are 99% exactly the same. But look at how big the difference is
between us, even with just these few molecules of DNA! Phenomena are
incredible! They are really beyond our comprehension. For example, cats have
only two vowels but they can still have a conversation with each other!
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
289



[Q] When we were starting to talk about kham, there was a verse where you said
rocks didn't have kham, so they couldn't be enlightened. But later we said that
Buddha-nature is all--pervasive. It's everywhere. This seems like a contradiction
to me.
(Al That's a good question, a very important question. There are many answers
for this one. Sometimes in Buddhism, the name 'Buddha-nature' refers to
emptiness, and it is not other than emptiness. In that case we use words like
'all-pervasive'. But here we're talking about something a little bit more than
that. It's emptiness, but not as in the exhaustion of fire and evaporation of
water, so we're talking about cognition (selcha), which is the aspect of clarity.
And when we say Buddha-nature, we are referring to selcha, the cognition, the
cognizer. So it is all-pervasive in beings, but earth, stones and trees are not
other than the mental projection of these beings. So you can say that in this way
they are also a projection of Buddha-nature, although very indirectly.
[Q] What exactly do you mean when you say stones are a projection of beings?
[A] They are objects, so there must be a subject.
[Q] But other beings are also objects of my subject.
[A] Yes, that's why I said that indirectly you could say they're a projection of
Buddha-nature, because they're your own projection.
[Q] But if we say that other beings are my projection too, we aren't saying that
the Buddha-nature is only there in them because it's indirectly my projection.
We said that the Buddha-nature is present in all beings in themselves, whereas it
is not present in all stones in themselves.
[A] Yes, of course we have to make this distinction. But when we say that all
sentient beings, even this dog, have Buddha-nature, that's your projection.
You're thinking it.
[Q] But that's not what it says here. The text says that Buddha-nature is present
in all migrating beings.
[A] Yes, but then we're talking about all sentient beings, not the projection of
individual beings.
[Q] But I'm talking about all stones, not just the stones that are my projection.
[A] When we talk about projection, we project both inanimate and animate
objects. I don't see any problem here, do you?
[Q] It seems that when we talk of Buddha-nature, it is something sublime and
ungraspable, and yet we speak of it as a graspable thing. We say it's everywhere
or not everywhere, it's not inanimate, and so on. For instance, perhaps there
could be a little spark in a stone?
(A) When we talk about a projection, we're talking about someone like Gérard
Godet dreaming about an elephant. And if I went to Gérard Godet in that dream
and asked if this elephant has Buddha-nature, he would say yes, she does.
[Q] But it seems to complicate the question when you mention projection. Why
can't we stay with the distinction between animate things and inanimate things?
Stones don't have mind, they are not sentient beings, and therefore they don't
have Buddha-nature. Why bring projection into it when we make that distinction?
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
290



[A] I have to be careful, as otherwise you couldn't do things like purifying the
land. And you couldn't visualise things as Sukhavati, and so on, because a stone
is a mental object (yigyi yu). It's the dhatu of Dharma (chökyi kham). Even when
you say something is unimaginable, you are imagining that it is unimaginable.
And it's just on that basis that I was saying that a stone is indirectly connected to
your mind. You can say that a stone is your mind's projection, but you cannot
say that a stone has mind.
[Q] In Buddha-nature, there is an aspect of emptiness. And in everything,
including a stone or a tree, there is also this aspect of emptiness too. I thought
that in their emptiness aspect, they are all inseparable?
[A] Yes, that's one way to understand this. Buddha-nature is sometimes referred
to as emptiness, but here when we talk about Buddha-nature, we are talking
about selcha, the clarity aspect, and then it's a little difficult to say that the stone
has Buddha-nature. The stone doesn't have wrapping, and if there is no
wrapping, then you are enlightened. But you can't really say a stone is
enlightened.
[Q] I still have a problem with the Buddha-nature and the stone. If trees and
stones are projections of our mind, then what about the planet we live on, earth?
Is it the same for our solar system, and even the galaxies around us? Are they
also projections of our mind?
(A) Yes, of course.
[Q] Why?
[A] The solar system is your projection, and it will go when you die. When you no
longer exist, then your projection is gone. Your solar system, your earth,
everything is gone. You might say that somebody can still see all this after you
die, but that somebody is also your projection. You are borrowing his projection
to prove your projection.
[Q] Doesn't ligme Lingpa introduce projection in a different way, when he talks
about perception and the objects of perception?
[A] Only the atiyoga people say things like that. They talk about the "form of the
display", but that's beyond us right now! It's these guys' department! (Rinpoche
looks at Tulku Jigme Khyentse Rinpoche and Tulku Pema Wangyal Rinpoche)
Right now, I'm only a Sakyapa, a follower of the mahasiddha Virupa, and he's a
Yogachara Chittamatrin. When we talk about a projection, we're not saying that
it has mind. We're saying that it's my mind's projection. For example, this
flower is my mind's projection, but that doesn't mean it has mind. I know that
there are some so-called alternative people who project that the flower has mind,
but that's their projection!
[Q] There's a famous Chinese story about Buddha-nature that seems to conflict
with your teaching. First, let me explain the story. There was a monk. He had
concept that every compounded thing, both animate and inanimate, has Buddha-
nature. The other monks didn't agree with him, so he left the monastery and
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
291



went to the countryside where he came across some stones. He told them that
all compounded things have Buddha-nature, and the stones nodded their heads
and agreed with his ideas. We might say everything is mind's projection, but we
have mountain gods, river gods, tree gods and so on, and I think it is much
better for us to think that every compounded thing has Buddha-nature, because
then we have a much better attitude towards trees.
[A] Very good! But you know I have to stick with what I told you.
[Q] And since animate and inanimate are equally projection of mind, animate and
inanimate all have Buddha-nature.
[Q] (Second student): This is the story of the monk Tao-shen. He was one of the
first to appreciate the theories of the Mahaparinirvana-sutra, where it says that
even the chantikas, those who are condemned never to become Buddha, have got
the Buddha-nature. And all the monks around him in Jen-Kang, the capital city
in those days, said they didn't believe him, and argued that some people will
never become Buddhas. He said, if that's the case, I ask the stones around me to
nod and agree. And the stones nodded. But the stones didn't say they had any
kind of Buddha-nature, merely that every sentient being without exception has
got Buddha-nature. So maybe we don't have the same story!
[A] A Chittamatrin would say that the nodding of the stones is his projection.
Anyway, I really admire those of you who really want plants and all that to have
some kind of Buddha-nature. I'm a non-vegetarian myself, so I really don't care
so much! But I really feel for you fanatical vegetarians, because if plants had
Buddha-nature, you'll have nothing to eat! The story also shows that this monk
is a very great and realised being. Such realised beings are called truth tellers,
because they have such a power of speech. Let's not talk about realised beings
and truth tellers now, but even if you really just know astrology, it is said that
you can actually change the world. Mipham Rinpoche was a great realised being,
but according to the stories, even if he were sewing a new shirt, he would look at
the almanac and check the right timing for when the needle should first enter the
cloth. All this was driving his attendants crazy, because everything had to be
done perfectly on time and so on. So his disciples confronted him, pointing out
that he had written so many commentaries on Madhyamika and non-duality, and
yet he was the most superstitious person! So Mipham Rinpoche took them to the
nearby river that was the source of their drinking water, and gave his attendant a
big stone and a very thin and fragile piece of dried grass. He told his attendant
to be ready, and when we gave the signal, to piece the stone with the grass.
Then Mipham Rinpoche spent a long time looking at the stars and the sky and
making calculations, and then suddenly he said, "OK, now!" and the grass went
through the rock! And despite repeated tries, the attendant couldn't do this
again. Mipham Rinpoche said, "If I did it, you'd say it's just because I'm a great
master and all of that. But I didn't do this, you did". He explained that this world
is based on the five elements, and they are always changing. And if you know
how to make the proper calculations, you can turn anything into anything else.
So I guess you can talk to your plants every 24 hours, ask how they are doing,
tell them they're beautiful and so on. I heard that some plants become very
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
292



gentle if they listen to Mozart. And the so-called tree gods and stone gods are
only called that because they are dwelling among the trees and stones. And I'm
sure that some animals look like trees or branches, so who knows? Maybe there
are such things. The bottom line is that the world is inexpressible. Actually,
everything that surrounds us is inexpressible. The carpet is inexpressible, the
flowers are inexpressible, and the tent is inexpressible. Our problem is that we
are trying to express the inexpressible, and that's why we're suffering.
[Q] We were discussing whether stone and wood have kham. Is there a difference
between the Mahayana and tantra when it comes to someone with devotion who
has carved a statue of Buddha from a stone or a piece of wood. Would that
statue contain the kham?
A] Do you mean after the statue has been consecrated?
[Q] Yes.
[A] I don't think those have kham, but I cannot really say. It's very difficult. As I
said, for the tantric practitioners, whatever exists outside actually exists within
your channels, not only within your mind.
Kham and Buddha-nature
[Q] I don't really understand the difference between Buddha, the first vajra point,
and kham. Also, why isn't kham translated as Buddha-nature?
[A] Buddha-nature is all of that, from the Buddha to activity - Buddha-nature is
the main subject of these seven vajra points - it's the subject of Uttaratantra. In
the text, different aspects of the Buddha-nature are taught. The first vajra point,
Buddha, is an aspect that places more emphasis on the result, on what can
happen. It is the model we are aspiring towards. The fourth vajra point, kham, is
the one who is looking at this model, so to speak. Someone who thinks that they
don't have the qualities of that model, and who somehow doesn't feel all right,
but who can become right and manifest as the Buddha. In the ultimate sense,
there is no difference between the Buddha and the kham.
[Q] Why do we talk about the consequences if the element didn't exist?
[A] Because of the extremists who don't believe in the rig. They don't believe
that there is an element.
[Q] We're just saying this to refute the extremists who deny it?
(A) It's like the Prasangika Madhyamika technique. We are saying that if there is
no rig, then we can't do this and that. It's a consequence that would arise if
there were no element. But of course there is rig everywhere, all the time, never
changing.
[Q] If I understand, gender is not part of Buddha-nature, so does it matter if it's a
king or a queen inside the woman's womb?
(Al I guess not.
[Q] Did Maitreya have a purpose in saying 'king'?
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
293



[A] No, the word means a 'ruler' basically. I think from my point of view, the real
universal ruler of the whole world is the Queen of England. She's all I can think
of at the moment. But then I must be careful, because now we're on the other
side of the Channel from Brighton, so perhaps Napoleon should be included!
dakpa,
[Q] During the second vajra point, Dharma, we were talking about the truth of the
path. We were talking about three words - purity, clarity and the remedial power
of the antidote. So what does this word clarity (selwa) mean in this context?
[A] It means that the kham is not inanimate. You see, before the selwa comes
which is 'purity' or 'emptiness'. That makes you think ‘nothingness', but
it's not nothingness. As I was saying, it's not a couch potato! It has a function,
namely clarity or cognition. It's more like cognizer, cognition, or wisdom. It's
something that is not inanimate, but cannot be understood as animate in the
ordinary way, because the ordinary animate means object and subject, but this
doesn't have that. Basically, it's jñana, wisdom, or self-awareness.
[Q] Why is this quality part of Dharma rather than Buddha or Buddha-nature?
(A] Because it is the truth.
[Q] If we define it like that, why isn't it the absolute refuge?
(A) At the end, the text says Buddha has both Dharma and Sangha. In that way,
Buddha's Dharma and Buddha's Sangha is the ultimate object of refuge. But
Dharma as scripture and realisation is not, because it changes, and so it is
deceptive. From the first bhumi to the tenth there's so much change.
[Q] It seems to be hard to find good words for kham, like 'element' for instance.
Why don't we use the word 'mind'?
[A] We do sometimes, such as when we say 'nature of mind'.
[Q] We can say that there is gold amidst the garbage, but how in everyday life can
we have confidence that all sentient beings have Buddha-nature?
[A] Intellectually or academically, my answer is by knowing that all defilements
are removable (drima dralrung). Actually, that's even a practice. It is the
quintessence of what these tantric people call pure perception (dak nang), namely
that the stain is removable. Of course tantric people say much more than that.
They say it's not only removable, but it's also your projection.
[Q] I don't understand the word nyingpo in stanza 27. Why does it say that it all
beings have the essence of Buddhahood, rather than they are Buddha? Because
in the example of the window, it would be like saying that the dirty window has
the essence of glass.
(A) It's path language. Even the term 'Buddha-nature' is path language.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
294



Kham and the gross & subtle elements
[Q] Is there is a difference between rig and kham?
[A] They're all so related - the seven vajra points are seven different kinds of
aspects of one thing. Actually, this kham, the element, is even related to the
gross elements. This is something that the tantric people talk about a lot. This
is why, for instance, when you receive the entering abhisheka, the preparation
abhisheka, they give you a string in order to protect or preserve the kham. It's all
related. We said that on the deshek nyingpo, the Buddha-nature, dwells wrong
view, and then emotions, karma, aggregates and all that, so it all has to relate.
Khenpo Appey Rinpoche said something quite interesting here. He said that
when we Dharma practitioners die, of course we should die peacefully and all
that. But if we have to get sick as a cause of death, then he said that cancers,
brain tumours and such diseases are really good diseases to die from, as they
invoke compassion. If as a tantric practitioner you die from flu or a cold, that's
considered to be somewhat of an obstacle. I became more intrigued with that
when he talked about kham again, because a flu or cold is related to an
imbalance of the outer kham, all the outer elements. It gets even more
interesting. For instance, in the tantra they say that when we look at a mountain,
even though we think the mountain is out there, the mountain is within you.
That's different from how the Mahayana talks, where they say that the mountain
is a mental projection (sem chi nangwa). The tantric people say it's not only a
projection, they say it exists within your channels, tsa. Again they are talking
about the kham, element.
I'm really intrigued about DNA! I think it's something wonderful that we should
really do some research on. I want to provoke you here. I think for a pure
Mahayana practitioner, it's very difficult to prove there's a next life. But if you're
a tantric practitioner, it's easy to prove. Because for the Mahayana, it's difficult
to prove that there is a mind independent from form. Our physical body (lu) is
gone, cremated, burned. But in the tantra, body, speech and mind are
inseparable, and isa, lung and tigley continue. So what do we mean by 'form'?
When we talk about things like the teeth of the Buddha, the 32 major marks and
all that, describing their appearance is a big generalisation. The Buddha's form
is the biggest generalisation, but it's a very useful generalisation, because it
always has an element that is slightly beyond the ordinary. For example, the four
arms of Avalokiteshvara are slightly beyond us, and the eyes on the palm of
Tara's hands and feet are beyond us.
Anyway, kham is a quality that is not inanimate, but then don't automatically
think that it is animate in the sense of mind. More than that, I cannot say! I am a
theologian here! If you want to experience all this directly, you should go to
some of the people sitting on my left (Rinpoche turns to Tulku Jigme Khyentse
Rinpoche and Tulku Pema Wangyal Rinpoche) and grill them with your devotion!
And you might get it because they said something, or perhaps you might get it
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
295



because they didn't say something! We just don't know! You can get it from
some kind of happening, or the happening of something not happening.
Basically, if you can create some permanent damage to this cocoon of vanity,
even on an intellectual level, then from that time onwards, you will be OK! Then
you are a so-called Dharma practitioner!
[Q] I just want to check that I understood. Did you say that when people die,
even if the gross body is burned and nothing remains, some element still
continues with the mind?
[A] I'm talking about tantra. They say body, speech and mind are inseparable.
They call it the primordially existing three doors. They talk about OM, AH, HUM
and stuff like that, nadi, prana, bindu, and so on. Who knows what the tantric
people are talking about? I say this only because Uttaratantra is supposedly
some kind of bridge between Mahayana and tantra, and perhaps now you can see
that it is really a bridge.
[Q] 1 find it very interesting when you talked about the red string that you are
given during the preparatory abhisheka to protect your element. And there, the
element means your bodhicitta, your pure bodhicitta. So when we use element
here to indicate Buddha-nature, are they related?
(A] Yes, they are very much related.
[Q] So then we are talking about Buddha-nature in some kind of form
[A] Yes. And the Nyingmapas say that you can even look at the Buddha-nature.
Now that's beyond me! You see, I'm a Sakyapa, and we don't know these things.
These guys say that you can actually look at it. You need three ways of sitting or
looking or something, and then you will see it. But this is here to my left!
(Rinpoche turns to Tulku Jigme Khyentse Rinpoche and Tulku Pema Wangyal
Rinpoche and smiles at them).
So we are talking about whether form, the gross element is related to the subtle
element, I mean the Buddha-nature element. When we say rig kham deshin
shekpey nyingpo, that's like the full name of the Buddha-nature, tathagatagarbha,
rig means race or family, kham is element, dewar shekpa is tathagata or Buddha,
and nyingpo is the essence. So again we find a reference to kham, the element,
Why have the great masters of the past, and even Lord Maitreya, insisted on
using this word? There must be a great reason. We talked about how earth
depends on water, water depends on air, and air depends on space. Likewise,
the aggregates are like earth, emotions are like water, wrong view is like air, and
all these things rely on space, which is Buddha-nature, kham. And that is the
paramita of clean, paramita of self, paramita of bliss, and paramita of
unchanging. The concept of rig or family is very much like planting rice. If you
plant rice, then a rice shoot comes. Think about this. If you plant rice, a rice
shoot comes. Now reverse the question: Why does the rice shoot come? Because
we planted the rice. And that's what we're studying here. We're not studying
how the rice shoot grows when you plant rice. We're studying why there is a rice
shoot. It's because you planted the rice. Why do sentient beings manifest as the
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
296



Buddha? Because the Buddha is there. This is why Longchenpa and all the
Nyingmapas say thartug rig chig: ultimately, there's only one race or family, not
five Buddha families. There's only one family, one vehicle, one yana, one
abhisheka and so on.
[Q] kham is a synonym of rigley in the Vajrayana, so is it a way to make a bridge
between Mahayana and Vajrayana to call it kham?
[A] Yes, I think so.
[Q] Why do we need to preserve the kham? How can the kham be preserved?
(AJ Oh this is tantric language. They do a lot of these kinds of things! Tantric
people are so afraid that kham will travel to the wrong places! There are so many
mazes in our body, so many roads. And when the inner wind pushes some of
this kham to certain wrong places, then you will experience the six realms in
various orders, or all together - things like that. So Vajrayana even has the path
to lead, so to speak, this kham to the right channel. But the kham is very subtle,
invisible almost. So the tantra uses the next agent that has a direct link with the
kham, and with which we also have some sort of good connection, namely the
prana. So we manipulate that by breathing in and out, all kinds of things. But
even that is quite subtle, so we use the next agent that has greater familiarity
with the prana, namely the nadi. So we practice sitting straight and all kinds of
yoga and all that. So symbolically, a red or multicoloured string is given to you
during the abhisheka. Usually you tie it to your left arm if you are male and your
right arm if you are female. You do this so certain nadis are - how can we say
this - manipulated, and so that you will preserve the kham.
[Q] is the kham described by Maitreya the same as the kham in the tantras?
(A) At least they're very much related. You should read Jamgön Kongtrül's work.
That's it - we can't go on talking about this too much!
Buddha-nature, mind & wisdom
[Q] In the last of the nine examples, Buddha-nature is called the nature of the
mind (semkyi rangshin), whereas we've been saying all along that the mind and
the nature are not connected.
[A] The nature of mind, semkyi rangshin, is not mind.
IQ] But they're connected?
[A] They're connected, like the mould and statue. You know the sentence, “Mind,
is not, mind is luminosity". The first wheel of the Dharma is the mind. Buddha
didn't negate the mind. Then second wheel of the Dharma is emptiness, and the
third is that the nature of the mind is luminous. That's Buddha-nature.
[Q] We saw in stanza 93 that the three wisdoms: liberation (namdrol); knowledge
(sherab); and wisdom (yeshey) are all the sun, radiance and light. We cannot even
separate what appears as ordinary sherab from wisdom. So even what appears to
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
297



us as knowledge in the mind is some light of the Buddha-nature, the primordial
yeshey that we have but we don't perceive.
[A] Yes, I think that ultimately we have to say that. But now you're really
touching some of the tantric stuff here too.
[Q] When you explained the two wisdoms the first time, you talked about the
primordial wisdom that doesn't dwell on phenomena. Please could you explain
this?
(A) I was talking about chaktok. Our deluded minds have what we call attachment
(chakpa) and blockage (tokpa). That's how all our inhibitions and habitual
patterns develop. For instance, on a more gross level, we have prejudices about
other people's colour, shape, behaviour, culture, sexual orientation or whatever.
This kind of prejudice comes from what we call chakpa and tokpa, and chaktok
basically comes from our education. For example, perhaps a certain religious
text might say that having a particular sexual orientation is not good, and so you
have been told that for generations, and you develop that idea. That's what we
call chakpa, you're clinging to that idea, and you're stuck with it, tok, on a gross
level. At a more subtle level, from the time that we're very young, we're taught
that this thing in front of us is a flower. From then on, we observe, cling to and
fixate on this phenomenon as a flower, and nothing more. If you were to say it is
an omelette, people would think you are crazy! That's what we call chaktok, and
it is the mother of all inhibition, prejudice, and pride. Everything comes from
that! And the absence of this chaktok is actually the Dharma. If somebody asks
you what Dharma is, it's already quite good to explain is by saying that it's
something beyond chak and tok. That's the Dharma, because that really explains
the truth. We are experiencing something every moment of every day, but when
we experience something like this flower, we don't have anything beyond that in
our heads. We can't know the non-flower-ness. So when a goat comes and eats
this very deliciously, all we can think is "the goat ate my flower!" That's about it.
And we don't know what the goat thinks. That's how everything works. We have
a very limited world, where a flower is a flower and that's it. That's very limited.
We don't know. A flower can be all kinds of things, but our mind is not creative
enough. Why aren't we creative? Because we have chak and tok. We are stuck,
and that's why we are all prejudiced, and also why we are plagiarists - we just
steal other people's ideas.
IQ] You said that the absence of a truly existent mind is not a sufficient attribute
for Buddha-nature?
Al Yes.
[Q] But the Prasangika Madhyamika produces not only a non-affirmative
negative, but also the consequence itself. Can we say that the wisdom that
perceives that there is no truly existent mind is the Buddha-nature?
[A] Yes, you can say that. According to the Shentongpas, as long as you
differentiate between mind and wisdom, it's fine.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
298



[Q] You said that we should know that we have Buddha-nature inside. It seems
true that to think that there is a Buddha outside is an exaggeration that we have
to get rid of. But to say that we have a Buddha-nature inside seems to me
somewhat extreme also.
(A) It's just to save you from being theistic. That's all.
[Q] But if I really believed that the Buddha is inside, I would probably eat my shit,
saying, "Oh, my Buddha-nature is here", or go everywhere and say, "I just
practice Buddha-nature, I don't need any goal". It seems that it would be more
secure to say that the guru is like the reflection in the lapis lazuli.
(A) OK, if that works for you.
The Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
Is Buddha-nature permanent?
[Q] When you talked about approximate enlightenment and ultimate
enlightenment, it sounded like approximate enlightenment is generated, whereas
absolute enlightenment is inherent. Does that mean that approximate
enlightenment is enlightenment, or does it become enlightenment? Is this like
kyerim and dzogrim, when first you generate and then you become, is this a
reference?
[A] It is, in a way. We need that, as without it, we cannot do the actual one.
[Q] Why?
(A) Because of the path, once again. It's all because of the path. The path is the
culprit!
[Q] Does someone who's approximately enlightened somehow surrender to
enlightenment and then become the real thing?
[A] No, as long as you are thinking about enlightenment, that's approximate
enlightenment.
[Q] Is this is a reference to the bhumis?
[A] Yes. Bhumis, stages, purification of defilements, accumulation of merit - all
these are approximate enlightenment. That's why I called real enlightenment
pre-dirty and pre-clean. Approximate enlightenment is when there's dirt, and
then there's cleaning. One of the great Sakyapa commentators, Ngawang
Chödrak, said that all Buddhist practice aims towards the result of elimination.
There's not a single thing that Buddhists do for a result of creation. I 't know
even know whether we should call the result of elimination a 'result'. Perhaps
state' is better, but even the word 'elimination' is misleading. It's freedom,
liberation - it's naturally eliminated, naturally liberated right from the beginning.
We were talking how you plant rice seed and then the rice shoot comes, and then
rice comes. So this dralwey dreybu, the result of liberation or elimination or
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
299



whatever, is with us already, although seemingly we haven't eliminated anything.
The seed is already there. You don't even have to plant it. You need some
conditions, like ploughing and fertilizer, but these are actually part of the path.
They are nothing to do with the rice. When you eat rice, you don't eat fertilizer!
But the fertilizer helps. And the result is rice, so we're back to the rice again.
That continuity is called kham. It is tantra, gyü, continuity or continuum -
although there is no continuum. It's the same thing.
As I've said many times, the result of elimination is not like a couch potato that
has no function. It has infinite function. It's the biggest wealth. When you are
buying the window glass in the shop, the pre-dirt and pre-clean glass, it's a big
wealth. But many scholars in Tibet don't have the courage to say this. They
prefer to emphasise the elimination and liberation bit rather than its qualities,
such as the lock of the Buddha's hair. Many scholars think that these qualities
have to be a product of accumulation of merit. But Mipham is saying that if this
were the case, then the Buddha's forms, the rupakayas, would not be unfailing
objects of refuge.
[Q] is the window glass permanent?
[A] That's a good question! The definition of 'permanent' is when there is no
beginning, middle and end. The window that is pre-dirty and pre-clean is free
from the beginning, middle and end of clean and dirty. So I will say that the
"window is free from beginning, middle and end". Whether you choose to call it
permanent or impermanent doesn't matter.
[Q] But the text says "permanent', which feels like lobbing a bomb into the whole
thing, as wouldn't that put that Buddha-nature beyond the four extremes.
Something that is permanent exists, but Buddha-nature is supposed to be
beyond extremes like existence. So is that path language? Or is it a
contradiction?
(A] No, it's beautiful language, because it's trying to describe that there is no
beginning, no middle and no end (togma tama umeypa)
[Q] So it's more like timeless presence than permanence?
[A] I think the best word is tagpa.
[Q] Can you relate that to the way we normally relate to the word 'permanent?
Until we got to this point, we're always being told about impermanence, and now
they're using the word 'permanent' to describe something that's supposedly
beyond existence
(A) Beyond existence?
[Q] Well, isn't this beyond the four extremes?
Al Yes.
IQ] So it's beyond existence?
[A] No, the reason why it's permanent is because it's beyond the four extremes.
[Q] But things don't exist.
[A] Exactly. That's what I was saying. For the window that is pre-dirty and pre-
clean, clean and dirty do not exist, and that is interpreted as permanent.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
300



[Q] is spontaneous presence (Thündrup) at odds with permanence?
(A) Not at all. If something has a beginning, middle and end, then it's not
spontaneous.
[Q] Permanence exists only in reference to impermanence, so it's a view. So why
is it called 'permanent' here? If it's a reference, if it depends on its opposite, and
then it is not something absolute.
(A) Why do we say everything is emptiness? Emptiness is in reference to not
emptiness. It's exactly like that. Here it's the same.
[Q] So this is a new meaning of tagpa?
[A] I don't think so. The word tagpa, which means 'permanent', has always been
something to do with no beginning, no middle and no end, not changing.
Nagarjuna's words 'no beginning, no middle and no end' and Maitreya's word
'permanent are the same.
(Q] You said that it wasn't as if the Buddha-nature wasn't there before and then
we found it. Nor is it appearing as a new phenomena. But relatively, we say that
the moment that we perceive a phenomenon is when it comes into existence. So
either we're always perceiving it, which means it's always there, or it comes into
existence the moment we perceive it.
(A) I guess you could say that the moment that we experience the removal of the
last thing to be removed, at the moment we can call it experiencing the absolute
Buddha-nature. We've been talking about it, but it's something that's impossible
to talk about, although I think we can say that the approximate Buddha is a
phenomenon.
[Q] Do we know that it was the last thing to be removed?
(A) Yes, I think so.
[Q] What if you've been cleaning a window for many years, even to the extent that
after many years we destroy the window because we think we don't need its
support to realise the elephant? And then what if on top of that we hear that
apparently people live longer if they see elephants?
(A) In this case, the analogy is slightly different. I don't think you destroy the
window at all. There's nothing to destroy. And we are not talking about the
window. We are talking about the pre-dirty and pre-cleaned. We don't even
know what a window is.
[Q] You said we have always been in this pre-clean state. So how come we have
never been without defilement? Why have we always had adventitious dirt? It
seems to me that one of the problems is that all the language we use is in terms
of time, and we think of 'before', of some primordial beginning or whatever.
Would it be right to say there is no time, no past?
[A] That would be safe.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
301



IQ] And our impression of history?
(A] That we have always been having defilements
[Q] If we've always had defilements since forever, for most of us that's a
problem. You can say that the defilements are adventitious but we think that
since beginningless time we've been defiled.
[A] I think the only thing is that we can see it can be manipulated, and I guess
through that we can gain some confidence, because it's caused and conditioned,
whereas the absence of that is not caused and conditioned.
[Q] But right at the beginning you talked about 'co-emergent' defilements or co-
emergent ignorance, and that sounds like ignorance from the beginning.
(A) Again we are talking about time, but it's path language, so there's no choice
except to speak like that.
Is Buddha-nature uncompounded?
[Q] You mentioned that some schools believe or the consequence of their view is
that the clarity aspect of the dharmakaya is a compounded phenomenon. That
sounds quite troubling to me. Because later we talk about the clarity, radiance
and so forth being one, so from their point of view the dharmakaya is a
compounded phenomenon?
[A] Yes, that's the consequence.
[Q] Which school is this? How can they claim to be Buddhist?
(A) This consequence applies to many new translation schools, including some
Sakyapas. I think it's all got to do with not having this concept of mind and
wisdom. As we were saying yesterday, when I say that it's not 'inanimate', then
automatically we think it's animate. i think that some of these scholars worked
out the path based on this ordinary idea of animate. If it is not inanimate, then
it's animate, and then the kayas, the path, the bhumis are all constructed on that.
But here, animate doesn't refer to the usual animate, because the usual animate
needs an object and subject. Here the wisdom is animate in the sense that the
object and subject have become inseparable (yuldang yulchen rochik). We are
talking about that kind of animate.
[Q] I understand that argument, but we still have this word 'compounded'.
[A] The usual animate has object and subject, so it's compounded. For most of
these scholars, the entire Buddhist path is based on the mind. Very few talk
about wisdom that is different from the mind. There's something important
here. What makes Buddhism different from many of the other religions?
Generally speaking, it's because Buddhists believe in interdependent reality. So
our path is based on cause and effect, so it's a causal path. This is something
that Buddhists brag about, and say that scientists and Buddhists can come
together over. Why? Because scientists also believe in cause and effect. This
path of cause and effect is something that we Buddhists are so proud of, but
there are certain schools that say you have to transcend the path of cause and
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
302



result, because if you dwell on that, you'll never reach enlightenment. This is
why you see books with titles like 'Buddhahood without meditation' (magom
sangyey). This is where these words come from. Prahevajra, Garab Dorje, was
accused of teaching a path beyond cause and effect, but why did he get all the
credit? Maitreya is actually talking about the same thing here. This path is
beyond cause and effect.
Now this is important, so listen carefully. The reason we use words like
‘uncompounded' and 'permanent' is because this path is not causal. Other
religions might talk about a permanent god, a permanent soul or whatever, but
that's absolutely different from what is being taught here. Because, first of all,
the other religions' permanent entity or whatever it is, is something that you
have to relate to. It's something or someone that you should pray to or be afraid
of. But when something uncompounded and permanent is there externally, and
you have to relate to it, it's a contradiction. You can't! Should he respond to
you? If he doesn't, why pray? If he does, then he becomes impermanent,
because he moves.
By contrast, this permanent and uncompounded Buddha-nature is something
that you already have. So what are we doing here? We are only eliminating, even
though it's sometimes called accumulating. And the Vajrayana people have
grabbed both these ideas, and then they make something big out of
nothingness! For accumulation, there's mandala. Purification, why not? That's
Vajrasattva. The uncompounded Buddha-nature is something you don't wish for
(möpa mepa). You don't aspire towards the Buddhist result. These are the three
characteristics of the Buddhist path: the essence is emptiness, the path is without
characteristics, and the result is without aspiration. You don't even have to
aspire for a lock of hair - you have it! So all we are doing is eliminating. The
word delete seems to be the most important here - the delete button! You are
creating more space, so that your gigabytes will be useful!
[Q] There seems to be quite a paradox here. If you say the Buddha's body is
uncompounded, then he didn't display his life. He didn't actually display the
truth of suffering - it was all a magical display. It didn't actually happen, because
nothing changed. It's an uncompounded body. Therefore surely he didn't
display the first Noble Truth? It was a fake. It was never there. Therefore there
is no truth of suffering.
[A] According to the Mahayana, yes.
[Q] So what is the nirmanakaya in that context?
[A] It is a paradox, you are right.
[Q] But it's a sambhogakaya manifestation, not a nirmanakaya form, isn't it? If
he's uncompounded, he couldn't change, so it must have been a magical display,
an illusion. His entire life is illusory. Is that right?
[A] For him, or for us?
[Q] For him and for us. He was just displaying, it wasn't actually happening.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
303



(A) I don't think he manifests for himself, for his own purposes. When we talk
about his point of view, there is no concept of manifesting or audience or any of
that. As soon as we talk about manifesting, we are talking about the path.
[Q] So the nirmanakaya form and sambhogakaya are both forms of display?
(A) I'm a little reluctant to say that the sambhogakaya is not a display, because in
some Mahayana sutras we read that the Bodhisattvas see the sambhogakaya. It's
being manifested to them. Well, it's not really manifested to them, but it's
realised by them. I guess it can't really be referred to as a display, because it's
what the Bodhisattvas are actualising. Basically, one is the example, and one is
the real one. Nirmanakaya is the example, and the sambhogakaya usually refers
to the clarity aspect of the Buddha-nature.
[Q] But we have a manifester that is primordially uncompounded, and a
manifestation that is compounded. It seems no problem to have space, then
earth, water and so on. But in that example, the space is purely negative, non-
obstructing. That's all. But here the manifester is not purely negative. The 32
marks are not arbitrary, so it's very difficult. We might say that it's something
like an uncompounded rupakaya, but if the rupakaya is uncompounded, it is a
form that cannot be perceived, because it is uncompounded.
A] Do you mean the sambhogakaya rupakaya?
[Q] Yes, both the sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya.
[A] Nirmanakaya is perceived. It's often referred to as a compounded
phenomenon, in many different quotations.
Q] But it's very difficult to think about the sambhogakaya, the one that's
uncompounded. It's very difficult to imagine or think about a form that cannot
be perceived.
(A) Yes. This is what the dzogchenpas always call it 'subject without object'.
That's how wisdom functions. Very good! If you realise that this is difficult, you
are starting to understand how wisdom works. It doesn't really work to say that
emptiness knows everything. It's better to say that wisdom, the Buddha's
wisdom, knows everything. So we're always referring to something like a
cognizer, but not a cognizer in the sense of object and subject. So that's why it's
not inanimate, but it's also not animate in the sense of mind, the subject and
object kind of animate. It's difficult!
[Q] Didn't the Buddha say, "I am an ordinary human being, like every one of you"
(Al That's the nirmanakaya talking.
[Q] Did we say that the sambhogakaya Buddha is also a compounded
phenomenon?
[A] No. It is the clarity aspect of Buddha-nature.
[Q] But in that case, how can Bodhisattvas perceive a sambhogakaya Buddha? If
you are talking about a perceiver, a viewer, then you talking about something
compounded.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
304



[A] We've already taken care of that. Remember, until the tenth bhumi, a
Bodhisattva's perception of sambhogakaya is compounded. Of course, it gets
better. It changes. The Bodhisattva's realisation is compounded, but that
doesn't change the sambhogakaya. As in all these examples of the gold coin, the
honey and so on, the real sambhogakaya such as the lock of hair is unchanging
and uncompounded.
[Q] is emptiness a compounded phenomenon?
(A) No. But approximate dharmakaya is sort of compounded.
[Q] Can an uncompounded phenomenon give rise to a compounded
phenomenon?
(A) No. But it can be perceived by deluded beings as a compounded
phenomenon, although that's a mistake. That's why right at the beginning
Maitreya says that the realisation of the Bodhisattva is changeable, because it's
accompanied by deception. That's why they are still on the Bodhisattva level.
Their realisation is not the ultimate object of refuge. But of course, as Maitreya
also says, from an ordinary point of view, we can't differentiate between the
activity of a tenth bhumi Bodhisattva and the post-meditation time of the
Buddha. It's impossible for us!
[Q] I thought that there was no post-meditation and no meditation for the
Buddha?
(A) You are right. But saying that there is no meditation and post-meditation
time is very much Madhyamika language. I think Maitreya would say that there is
no difference between post-meditation and meditation. It's slightly different way
of saying the same thing. One says that there is no such thing as the meditation
for the Buddha. Why would Buddha meditate? There is no meditation and no
post-meditation. But that's exactly the same as when Maitreya says that his
meditation and post-meditation become inseparable. The only difference is that
Maitreya always likes to say there is something. It's very encouraging!
Maitreya's teaching is always from the point of view of clarity, quality, or the
result of elimination (draldrey). Whereas Nagarjuna's teaching is always from the
point of view of elimination (dralwa). That's why they complement each other so
well. Nagarjuna says in the Mulamadhyamikakarika that "there is no tathagata",
and Lord Maitreya says that "the tathagata is uncompounded". They're saying
the same thing. Both are necessary. These two are amazing, that's why they are
called the two great chariots.
Q] All these qualities of the Buddha seem completely distinct. They have no
common ground with beings or even Bodhisattvas, but it's quite difficult to
understand how the tree can have no common ground with the seed or the child
with the mother or the honey with bees, or the status with the mould, and so on.
(A) When we talk about womb and mother, we are talking about Buddha-nature.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
305



[Q] Yes, but you also said when we say “enlightenment", we can understand this
is terms of the being getting enlightened, or the enlightenment itself. So is this
enlightenment also completely distinct from this Buddha nature?
[A] Yes, I think so. When we were talking about Buddha-nature, we were talking
more about kham, the element. And when we talk about kham, we talk about it
as it if is a seed, something that you plant and plough it, so it is more like a path.
[Q] But you said Buddha-nature was not a seed. All the qualities are fully there
from the very beginning, completely enlightened.
(A) What choice do I have? But we still have to talk about the path, and when we
talk about the path, we have to talk about the mould and we have to talk about
uncovering the statue.
[Q] Yes, but by now we know there is no use in cleaning the glass, because it's
completely different from the quality of the dirt, so there is no use!
[A] You sound slightly like a Rangtongpa. This is what the Rangtongpas would
say! I'll tell you something. When the Shentongpas are really daring, the great
Shentongpa masters, they say, "Yes, that's exactly what you should do. Don't do
anything!" But that's so difficulti
The Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
The 32 major marks
[Q] This is also a question when it comes to the human body. If each single hair
of the Buddha is really present, then why should something completely inanimate
like a hair have this ultimate reality or Buddha-nature?
(A) What do you mean by inanimate? Do you mean the teeth and the hair?
[Q] If you're talking about teeth and hair and skin, you're talking about human
characteristics.
[A] When we talk about 32 major marks, then that form is draldrey. They're all
kayas and wisdoms (kudang yeshey). For instance, when we do development
meditation, they're a product of that.
[Q] So when we talk about the Buddha's physical qualities, they're not physical
qualities like our physical qualities?
A] No, but we have them nevertheless.
[Q] Why should this ultimate Buddha have a human form and these human
characteristics?
(A) It doesn't!
IQ] But we have talked about the form of the Buddha's teeth, hands and so on
resembling ours.
[A] Well, first of all, the nirmanakaya Buddha is a projection of disciples like us.
Let me give you my view. The sambhogakaya form also has the 32 major marks
and all that. When we say "mouth", for example, I think we are referring to
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers 306



something that is above our neck and below our nose, where things go inside,
and if we have bulimia, where things occasionally come out. But I don't think you
can think like that in the sambhogakaya. This is why at the end it always says it's
inconceivable (samgyi mi khyapa). Do you know why the sambhogakaya Buddha
wears crowns, jewels and all that? It's a very important teaching. When praising
the Buddha, Nagarjuna said "Buddha, you never said that there is enlightenment
by abandoning the samsara. You only said there is nirvana by knowing there is
no samsara". To symbolise that, the Buddha wears royal dress and he is adorned
with pleasure objects. All this is symbolic. Even in the nirmanakaya form, one of
the most important attributes is the ushnisha, and it is said that it cannot be
measured or talked about. So that's an indication. But you're right. I guess it's
to make it easier for us to relate to a Buddha with hands, a mouth, some colour.
[Q] We were talking about our inability to see or accommodate the major marks.
Do you think that our inability to accommodate them comes from the planning
trap, our expectations and preconceived ideas? Should we just trust the practice
and that the merit will grow?
[A] Yes, definitely. When Bernardo Bertolucci was making "The Little Buddha" in
Nepal, there was a protest, and a scene that had to be cut out. Beautiful girls
were massaging Siddhartha, and the Buddhists in Nepal were furious! They were
all looking at me, thinking that I was supposed to be an advisor for this film, and
yet here was a scene with the Buddha drinking wine and being massaged by
beautiful girls. You know, for most Buddhists, Buddha is a golden statue in the
temple, and that's as far as it goes.
[Q] I would like to ask about the uncompounded marks and qualities of the
Buddha. Should we consider those marks as metaphoric or is it something else?
(A) Metaphoric is maybe a good way to understand them, since it's the
manifestation Buddha, which appears to Bodhisattvas. Perhaps 'symbolic' is a
better word. The 32 major marks, 80 minor marks and so on symbolise the body
or kayas and wisdoms (kudang yeshey). They symbolise the infinite. But that
actually works with everything. For example, what if Gérard Godet opens the
window, and then sees a completely naked elephant? I heard that actually
happened a few days ago! This elephant has long nails, and Gérard Godet is
holding a cup in his hands, and then the cup falls from his hands, because he is
completely amazed by the beauty before him! And beauty is what attracts you.
It always works like that. Isn't all of it symbolic?
[Q] I'm happy with the idea that it's a symbol, but I think every word we use is a
symbol, so it doesn't help very much. But maybe if I could go on a metaphoric
level, it would allow some imagination and maybe it would help.
[A] You mean it doesn't help you to have a model that has webbed hands? But
that's exactly what I'm saying about Gérard Godet. For him, my goodness, that
sight brings a heart attack!
[Q] That amazement at the signs and qualities of the Buddha is what I'm longing
for!
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
307



[A] It's somehow the same for me. As I was saying yesterday, we need an object
of supplication, an object to long for. And right now, as deluded beings, we can
only long for someone or something that is slightly familiar to us. But the object
shouldn't be too outside the ordinary, too off the track. Our human mind likes a
little bit of difference, but not too big. For example, Gérard likes to have
something really elephant-like!
[Q]{Gérard} I hope that elephant isn't a symbol for someone we know!
[A] I thought the elephant is dwelling right opposite your house these days? But
you know, we are attracted to the elephant, well at least Gérard is attracted to the
elephant, because it has two eyes, and some kind of human form! But then this
kind of clinging to symbolism also changes, as you find new information. For
instance, when you practice the deity, you find new information. The wrathful
deities supposedly have the same 32 major marks, but for the practitioner they
change and new ones are revealed. And your idea changes, of course. If Gérard
finds out that this elephant travels with a grinding machine, then Gérard will
think twice! And I'm not saying that Gérard will dislike this elephant. He might
like it more!
[Q] A few days ago you said that there was no self, that all is impermanence, and
yet today you say that there is an uncompounded lock of the Buddha's hair! is
there a connection between these two points of view when you say that?
[A] Normally the self is imputed, labelled, it's a delusion. By contrast, this lock of
hair is a result of elimination (dralwey dreybu). I think that's a good answer.
[Q] When ordinary beings met the nirmanakaya Shakyamuni Buddha, did they see
the major and minor marks?
A] Some of them did, I think. Even if a person sees him as beautiful, this alone
means that this person has the merit to get closer to that kind of 32 major
marks.
[Q] But if they literally saw the major and minor marks as they are described, it's
difficult to see how the Buddha could have functioned. For instance, if he had
such a huge tongue that it could not even fit into a normal human mouth, how
could he eat with it, or even speak? It's a kind of contradiction, unless it's just a
symbol. Because when we talk about all these major and minor marks, if you put
them all together, you get something, which is scarcely recognisable as a human
being!
[A] But that's the whole point, isn't it? There's a story about when
Maudgalyayana (one of the Ten Great Disciples of Shakyamuni Buddha) wanted to
see the Buddha's ushnisha. He had to travel all the way up to Tushita heaven and
he still couldn't see the tip of the ushnisha! I think that if ordinary people like
you and I had been there, we couldn't begin to contain the Buddha's qualities in
our heads. For example, the length and width of the Buddha's body are equal.
It's like a box. But then there are slightly better audiences, and they will
understand. If I had been there, I would not have understood. But someone
better than me can understand. Again, we're still talking about perception.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
308



[Q] Are you saying that they're part of the rupakaya, or are they part of the
dharmakaya? In other words, are these marks for us?
(A] There are two, and the one that we perceive through our practice is not the
object of refuge. It's part of our realisation, and it exhausts. In any case, the
Buddhas have accumulated a lot of merit, for three countless aeons. The
ushnisha alone, that took a lot of time. The ushnisha is the biggest, and then the
urna (dzőpu). So the Buddha definitely has qualities that are beyond us. My mind
might not understand why Gérard likes this elephant. It just doesn't fit in my
head. But he does! It turns him on, and it makes him drop his tea! It's all like
that!
[Q] So the Buddha is beyond us?
(A) I guess so. But that's not so bad. After all, what about Hevajra or
Chakrasamvara? At least Shakyamuni is serene and barefoot, golden in colour
and beautiful. But if Hevajra or Chakrasamvara walked towards us, it would be
disgusting! You know the story of Milarepa and Rechungpa, where Milarepa went
inside the yak's horn, but Milarepa didn't become any smaller, and the yak's horn
didn't become any bigger. Rechungpa was shocked. Milarepa was teasing
Rechungpa for going to India to look for non-duality, when he could receive it
from him. But for me, the fact that Rechungpa was able to experience this at all
means that Rechungpa is a great being. If I had been there and I was lucky
enough to see them, I'm sure I would just have seen two Tibetans talking for the
whole afternoon, maybe with Milarepa holding a horn or something like that, and
that's about it. I would have missed it completely!
IQ] What are the Buddha's eyes like?
[A] They're slightly blue, supposedly like a deer's eyes, with lot of dark on the
sides.
IQ] Why do we say they are like a lotus?
[A] That's all we can say!
[Q] If you see Yeshe Tsogyal, do you see her like this?
(A) It's Vajrayana people that talk about things like that. Here we are talking
about the common Buddha. With all this talk of Yeshe Tsogyal and Vajrayogini,
you're talking about some secret societies. I don't know what they're talking
about! Those people say the real Buddha's form is wrathful, and they can fit that
with this. You should have the aspiration to study gyü lama according to a
Vajrayana explanation of Jamgön Kongtrül's commentary, as then the 32 major
marks fit very well. All these things can be interpreted, except for four things:
the four voices or four seals, such as “All compounded things are impermanent"
and the rest.
[Q] When you talked about the Buddha's all-pervasive wisdom, you said it's
because he knew his mind, and that's the only way he could know things as they
actually are. How would the Rangtongpas answer that?
(A) The Rangtongpas are fine with that, but they would say that mind is empty of
its nature. It doesn't have 32 major marks, eighteen uncommon qualities, ten
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
309



powers and so on. They are all the result of maturation, so mind doesn't have
them. If you stick the Uttaratantra text next to a Rangtongpa's face and say
"Look, it says it has these qualities, what is this", they'll say "Oh, it only means it
has the potential". The Shentongpas will say, “Ha, you Rangtongpas have to add
the word potential". There are so many arguments over things like that.
[Q] When Buddha said, “Those who see me as a form have wrong view", does he
mean those who see him as an ordinary man without these marks sees wrongly,
or does he mean that even somebody even who sees these marks is wrong?
[A] Even someone who sees these marks is wrong. He's indicating non-duality.
Some of these things are impossible!
[Q] Are the 32 major marks present for all Buddhas in the sambhogakaya?
[A] Yes.
[Q] And since there are uncompounded phenomena, I wonder how they can be a
skilful show adapted to the audience of a certain era? For example you said that
in the future there will be Buddhas with feminine marks. If they are
uncompounded, how can they change with time?
[A] It's not that they will be feminine. They already are and already have been.
(Q] Please explain.
(A) This is just this fortunate eon here, where there will be a thousand Buddhas,
that's the common description. Remember the stanza said there's a
dharmakaya, the one that manifests. And there are two kinds of show,
sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya is an exclusive show, like
something rated "18" or "R". And there is a common show, a show for the
common people. When we talk about hierarchy or authority, one would think
dharmakaya has the highest authority, but that's not the case. When we talk
about authority it's actually based on the nirmanakaya. The nirmanakaya's
manifestation has the authority. But this authority or hierarchy that we are
talking about is only on the relative level, the audience's level. The real
dharmakaya, sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya have no hierarchy at all. This is
why Shravakayana people, let's call them Hinayana for once, have no burden to
prove that Mahayana is a teaching of the Buddha. They don't have to. And it's
also understandable when they say Vajrayana is actually Hindu. While they have
no burden to prove that our teaching is the Buddha's teaching, we have to accept
that their teaching is the root of the teaching. So on the common level, the
Hinayana doesn't have the problem of proving that there's a Buddha called Tara
or there's a Buddha with four arms. But we have to say that right now, in this
era, the only Buddha who walked in the flesh is Shakyamuni, the prince of the
Shakya clan, the son of Shuddodhana and Maya, who came to India and not
France, all of that. We have to say that. We have no choice. Individually, if you
talk about Vajrayana, you can think of your guru as the Buddha. That's individual
practice. That's your own burden, and if that happened to be an authentic guru
then there's lots of reward, as it's your own lapis lazuli. But all of this has to
come from the right motivation, which is seeking enlightenment. Just because
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
310



one is a feminist, if one thinks that a feminine guru is more to your liking, then
there's something wrong with your motivation there. I'm thinking I should soon
recognise a gay guru and a lesbian guru. It would be very good for marketing.
[Q] I'm even more confused now. Because what you say about the life of prince
Siddhartha sounds to me like a relative teaching adapted to a certain time and
audience, while the 32 marks are not compounded phenomena and you say they
even exist in the sambhogakaya.
(A) Don't forget that Shakyamuni Buddha is a show.
[Q] So it can change with time, because it is a show?
[A] Yes.
[Q] But the 32 marks are uncompounded. They are not a show. So why are they
just masculine?
(AJ No, Shakyamuni Buddha's 32 marks are a show. The whole Shakyamuni
Buddha, from top to bottom, is a show
[Q] How can the 32 marks adapt to the capacity of an audience, a samsaric
audience?
[A] The 32 major marks, all of this, are in the reflection, the lapis lazuli. No one
has created this. It's uncompounded. Now someone like you walks in and
because of your fortune there is no dirt, and so you see the Buddha.
(Q] And 1 see a feminine Buddha.
(A) Yes, that's fine. You can see a female Buddha, that's fine. But that's not what
I mean by the nirmanakaya common Buddha. If you want to have another kind,
you are in the wrong aeon. There are 996 more Buddhas to go. And according
to Jamgön Kongtrül, there is a place where there are only feminine Buddhas. And
they all have different reasons. For instance Shakyamuni chose to come when
people's maximum life span is only about 100 years. But when Maitreya
becomes enlightened, I think sentient beings' maximum life span will be 80,000
years. And this all has a purpose. For instance, why 80,000 years? Because
everyone will be enjoying themselves and having a nice time, so people will not
listen to the dharma. They will not want the dharma. So Maitreya thinks, since
nobody else is going around that time, let me go then. Anyway, since you're a
woman, unless you are lesbian, which isn't the case from what I know, for you
Buddha should be a man! Actually most feminists should have Buddha as a man.
It works better. If all the feminists ended up with a Buddha who's a woman, oh
my god, there would be a problem! But anyway, in this fortunate aeon, the
thousand Buddhas are all men, princes. We should never dilute the
Buddhadharma. We shouldn't make it up as time goes by. The historical Buddha
is a man, a prince. He shouldn't have a sex change just because it pleases some
of us. It's useless, and won't serve much purpose anyway. And it's not as if we
don't have female Buddhas. In this case we are talking about an exclusive
audience. We have plenty, more than Shakyamuni Buddha in fact, if you want to
think like that. We don't need to change anything. And on top of that, we
shouldn't forget the words 'inconceivable' and 'generalisation'. I have been
generalising about something that is inconceivable! The 32 major marks are a
very big generalisation.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
311



[Q] The marks are rather masculine. Do we all get the elephant part in the end,
or is there a female equivalent?
(A) According to Maitreya, when you get enlightened, it's in the format of one
with the elephant part. This has nothing to do with masculine and feminine. I
have to be true to the author.
(Student] The image of the elephant is not very feminine in any case!
[Student) It's very clever because when it's hidden the two genders are almost
indistinguishable!
[Q] If you say the Buddha's major and minor marks are present in sambhogakaya,
the way they are described is specifically masculine. Are these same major and
minor marks present in Tara?
(A) I think so.
[Q] But they're masculine
[A] Not really. As Lord Maitreya clearly stated, the sambhogakaya major marks
are an exclusive show for some exclusive people. So we can talk about this until
our mouths get wide, but nothing will get any clearer.
[Q] You said the Rangtongpas say that the Buddha's qualities have to be
developed.
[A] Yes, these qualities the 32 major marks
[Q] That seems totally contradictory to the statement that all phenomena are
enlightened.
(A) What do you mean? You mean in the absolute nature, like the sky that is pre-
cloud?
[Q] Yes, but I'm referring to the first of the Four Fearlessnesses, when the Buddha
said that all phenomena are enlightened.
[A] He has no fear to say that all phenomena ultimately have no stains.
[Q] Isn't it contradictory for the Rangtongpas to say that the qualities have to be
developed?
(A) No, they can always escape from it. They say that it has the potential, and
that's what the Buddha meant. It has the potential. They do not negate and say
it doesn't have the potential. It's very subtie. What are you going to say? Wilt
you say "make my window clean", or "clean that dirt on my window". Can you see
the difference?
[Q] But we've been told that the window has always been clean, and it will never
be dirty.
[A] I've been lenient to the Shentongpas sometimes.
[Q] But isn't that a safer presumption?
[A] The Rangtongpas would not agree. They might say it's a little dangerous, as
you might end up mixing this with atman and all the 'soul business and all that.
[Q] I just think it might be easier to recognise stains when you have the
presumption that it is already clean and never dirty.
Al It depends on what kind of preparation you have.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
312



[Q] When you were explaining the qualities of the speech of the Buddhas, you
said that the Pratyekabuddhas only have part of that understanding. If that's so,
what's the level of comprehension of a Pratyekabuddha compared to someone
like me?
[A] Until you are on the seventh bhumi Bodhisattva, you cannot outshine
Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas with your intellect. So we are talking about a
very big difference. That is, if you are not a seventh bhumi Bodhisattva. They
have destroyed the four maras. They will never go back to samsara. They don't
see any difference between the palm of their hand and the sky, or between dirt
and gold. And on a more outer level, they can have fire burning on the lower half
of their body, and the upper half water.
The activity of the nirmanakaya
[Q] When you were talking about the causes of the Buddha's spontaneity, you
said that the second one is that there is no difference between his enlightenment
and our enlightenment. But wouldn't it be more accurate to say there's no
difference between him and our enlightenment?
Al I guess so.
[Q] It kind of bothers me, this vagueness between Buddha Shakyamuni on the
one hand, and Buddha-nature on the other. If there was a historical Buddha
Shakyamuni, what's the connection between him and our Buddha-nature? Is he
really outside us?
[A] No he's just a reflection.
[Q] But did somebody called Shakyamuni actually walk around on the earth?
[A] Yes, for the group of beings that has similar collected karma.
[Q] But was he a human being like us?
(A) You mean Shakyamuni himself? He's a reflection, but he's a perfect reflection
of a human being
[Q] is he a human being in our sense of the word? Like we are?
(Al I think he is.
[Q] If he's a separate human being, how can he be the same thing as our Buddha
nature?
IA] He is not really a separate human being, because he's your reflection. But he
appears exactly like a human being. Not quite exactly, because antelope-like
ankles don't really work there!
[Q] But people didn't see him like this, with antelope legs, did they?
(A) I really don't know.
[Q] You seem to be saying, yes, both.
[A] I think so
[Q] I have a question about the nirmanakaya. According to Shentongpa point of
view, the nirmanakaya is uncompounded. But there are the 32 marks that are the
effect of maturation. And you mentioned, and the text also says, that these are
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
313



the perfection of the previous virtues and aspirations of the Bodhisattva. So how
can that be uncompounded?
[A] When we say "previous virtue" and all of that, the Shentongpas would say that
so-called 'previous' is just a show, even the very concept of previous'. It's your
mind doing it all. There's no somebody who was previously a monkey and who is
becoming a Buddha.
[Q] So primordially we are all uncompounded?
[A] That's what the Shentongpas seem to be saying.
[Q] is that what Maitreya is saying?
(A) The Shentongpas would like to think like that!
[Q] We are speaking about the Buddha very much in terms of the human realm.
How do animals receive the activities of the Buddha?
[A] As I said before, the Buddha is manifesting all the time. How much is being
received and interpreted depends on sentient beings.
[Q] So animals cannot interpret much?
A] This is why Vajrayana people say the Vajrayana is so special, and especially
why this precious human body is so special, because we can use all these pranas
and bindus and so on.
[Q]: You said there's no way to refer to dharmakaya, but for whom? How can we
say there is no way to refer to it? It seems independent of people who try to see
it.
[A]: This is quite good actually. There is actually a Hindu school that believes in
an inexpressible self. There's a big difference there, because for that Hindus,
self exists, but it's not expressible. But the dharmakaya does not even exist.
Remember, it's not born, it's not abiding, and it's not ceasing to exist. It cannot
be perceived with intellect or conception. As long as something is a concept, it
has to have subject and object. With this kind of mind, dharmakaya cannot be
perceived. But as has been said many times, only the yogis during their
meditation state can experience it.
[Q] But the Bodhisattvas cannot pass on the wisdom of the dharmakaya even to
higher yogis?
(A) They will have a little bit.
[Q] Otherwise it would be completely useless.
(A] Yes, that's right. And there's another thing that means it's not useless. The
sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya will always make sure that dharmakaya is not
useless. And although dharmakaya does not manifest, the sambhogakaya is
close to its true character. And although many of the nirmanakaya's activities are
very ordinary and worldly, there's always something quite extraordinary about
them also, like the 32 major marks. They are inconceivable.
[Q] We talk about this being the causal path, but in samsara, if we fixate on the
mould then it doesn't serve its purpose, and it is a problem. Because the mould
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
314



is just a passing, fleeting cause for the Buddha statue to emerge. So does the
Uttaratantra also indicate a result path?
[A] Which result?
[Q] Like when we say the nirmanakaya appears all the time and we can potentially
see it.
[A] I guess so.
[Q] But if we fixate and make it dualistic then the mould is a problem. We have
to break it. But we could also say the mould is great, as with the mould we have
the statue. Is it OK to say that?
(A) Maybe not in the Mahayana. There we don't really give any credit to the
mould.
[Q] But then what is the connection between cause and effect if they are
ultimately not connected, in other words if the result doesn't appear to depend
on the cause?
[A] The mould and the statue are not really about cause and effect. That
example revolves around the fact that the mould is outside the statue, and there
is the business of uncovering. The statue doesn't know there's a mould. From
the statue's point of view there is no mould.
[Q] But that is pointing at a flaw in our way of functioning, nothing else.
(A) Right now, during the path, yes. So there is the mould and all of that. But
still we do not give any credit to the mould. One should not understand the
mould as the cause.
[Q] is the Uttaratantra resulting from Maitreya's realisation, or something that he
transmits from someone else? Because at one point you say that teaching itself
says 10th a bhumi bodhisattva cannot understand the qualities of the Buddha,
and he's talking about the qualities of the Buddha.
[A] Maitreya is disciple of the Buddha.
[Q] So he's transmitting the teaching of the Buddha?
[A] Yes, of course! The Buddha is very much the boss! Buddha Shakyamuni has
amazing disciples.
The Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
The reflection in the lapis lazuli floor
[Q] Can you become completely enlightened just by looking at the lapis lazuli
floor? Would that give you enough guidance?
[A] Yes, I suppose so.
[Q] So why wouldn't Pratyekabuddhas be totally enlightened, as surely that's
what they're doing. They are looking at the lapis lazuli floor. They have no other
teacher.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
315



[A] They have some dirt on their lapis lazuli floor. It's about the capacity of the
receiver. The Pratyekabuddha is too lazy to clean it
[Q] But surely he's being guided by what he's seeing. He's cleaning the floor,
and he's seeing more clearly, so why can't he become totally enlightened?
[A] Yes, but sometimes you clean and you think you have got it, and you can't get
more than that.
[Q] So what additional thing do you need apart from the lapis lazuli floor, as the
metaphor is that you just need the lapis lazuli floor and it will guide you?
[A] You need the floor, but there's all the dirt, so you have to clean it. And
you've got to be not satisfied with what you're cleaning.
[Q] So the Pratyekabuddha is lazy?
[A] He's lazy relative to the Bodhisattvas
[Q] So, there's more than the lapis lazuli floor. He has to do it for other beings,
as surely his lapis lazuli floor is for himself.
(A) Not the lapis lazuli floor, but there is more dirt to clean
[Q] So you can't become enlightened just by looking at the floor and cleaning it?
[A] Yes you can.
[Q] So why doesn't the Pratyekabuddha?
[A] He has left a little bit of dirt, not knowing that it's dirt.
[Q] But it is said the Pratyekabuddhas don't have the guidance of a Buddha which
is why they can't become completely enlightened.
[A] No, it's not that. It's their motivation. Let's put it this way. Some Shravakas
and Pratyekabuddhas end up thinking of some of the dirt as decoration.
[Q] So is this lapis lazuli that isn't fully cleaned the difference between one-fold
egolessness and two-fold egolessness?
(A) Yes, it's basically about what they are satisfied with. It's like you have invited
a guest to your home, and you only have 5 minutes to clean, so you just clean a
little bit so that it's good enough to receive a guest. If you have more time and
you're fussier, you think that much is not good, so you clean more.
[Q] So the basic idea is that everyone is looking at the lapis lazuli floor and
seeing the reflection of Indra. The people who are looking at the floor aren't
aware there is an Indra, all they see is a reflection. But there is an Indra
reflecting in the floor. When you compare this example with the Buddhist view,
one looks into the floor, and depending on how clean the floor is, one sees
Shakyamuni or maybe even Mohammed or Jesus or whatever. Am I right in
thinking that the difference is that there's nothing outside reflecting in the floor,
whereas there is an Indra reflecting in the floor? It's not that there is a Buddha
outside.
Al Just in this example it's just the reflection that is the most important thing,
not its source.
[Q] But it's a reflection of Buddha-nature, not the external Buddha, because there
is no external Buddha?
[A] Yes, exactly.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
316



[Q] You said that just by looking at the lapis lazuli floor even without knowing
that it is a reflection, people would train and get enlightenment. But at least in
the Vajrayana, and I suppose also in the Mahayana, it's said that by knowing it's
a reflection we get enlightened quicker.
[A] Who knows about the Vajrayana? I think they say something like that.
[Q] But don't they also say it's better to know it's a reflection and not mistake it
for the true thing? Mistakes have never been praised either in Vajrayana or
Mahayana. What would Mahayana people say?
[A] That we don't know it's a reflection, that the reflection doesn't know it's
causing some benefit, but there's some benefit anyway. Just like putting on
lipstick using a mirror.
[Q] But the Buddha taught that it is a reflection.
(A] We know that now, but when it comes we don't know. Remember that.
[Q] Can this Buddha be said to act in any way? He sounds completely passive.
It's the argument used by Buddhists against the idea of a permanent god. Such a
being cannot exist because he cannot act, so he's completely pointless.
(A) That's coming! That's one of the vajra points, Activity'. The Buddha's action
is very much your own interpretation.
[Q] You gave the example of the tent not being a soup, but how does the Buddha
know it's not a soup?
(A) I don't think the Buddha will have that 'soup' or 'tent' or 'no-tent-no-soup'
or any of that. It's more like we're stuck with the notion or phenomenon of
'tent'. We think that something that looks like this has to be a tent, and can't be
soup. Out of that stuckness comes everything, like clinging to etiquette,
behaviour, and all of that. For example, in some societies sticking out your
tongue is polite. Some people are stuck with it, not literally, but we are stuck
with certain phenomena like behaviour, etiquette, culture, and so on. There are
so many. The big one is samsara and nirvana.
[Q] You say that the effect of the Buddha's activity depends on his prayers and
merit. But when the Buddha made those prayers he was a Bodhisattva. He
wasn't enlightened. He wasn't yet perfect. So in those prayers there's an aspect
of purity, and an aspect that is impure. So why is it that only the pure aspects of
his prayers are fulfilled?
[A] According to the Mahayana, the moment we talk about "when he was a
Bodhisattva", it's all a reflection on the lapis lazuli.
[Q] In The Words of My Perfect Teacher when Patrul Rinpoche was explaining
cause and effect, he said even the Buddhas have to see something of the effects
of their actions, but according to the Uttaratantra, they're already gone beyond
all that.
[A] That's no problem, because when the Buddhas see these effects, it's all a
show.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
317



[Q] When Maitreya transformed from the sick and mangy dog into Maitreya, was
he in sambhogakaya form?
[A] I don't think so. He's a Bodhisattva. This is a pure, strict Mahayana class
[Q] So Asanga would just see a human form?
(A) He's not a Buddha yet.
[Q] I was thinking that if he were sambhogakaya, then everything would have
been a pure realm, wouldn't it? He wouldn't have walked him around the streets
on his shoulders
A] He could.
IQ] What, in a pure realm?
[A] Yes, but Maitreya is not sambhogakaya, he's a tenth bhumi Bodhisattva in the
state of gyünta, the last limit, the last stream, the last moment just before he
becomes Buddha. When the right time comes, he will come. There are two
chariots of Mahayana Buddhism, one is Nagarjuna and some say the other is
Asanga, others say Maitreya. All of them are Bodhisattvas
[Q] But when you see images of Maitreya, he looks like he's sambhogakaya.
(A) He's wearing royal costume, that's all. Asanga is a very important figure for
the lineage of Buddha-nature teachings for that. Asanga and Maitreya. Without
these two, Nagarjuna and Asanga, Mahayana studies would be very difficult.
Actually it's all thanks to a woman, a nun. She was in India and thought that as a
woman she might not be able to do much. So this nun got married to a king, and
out came Asanga, then she changed partners to a Brahmin and next came
Vasubandhu.
[Q] I have a question about the rupakayas. You said that if we have merit, we
could even see a breeze as the manifestation of the nirmanakaya?
(Al When we talk about nirmanakaya, the manifestation of the Buddha, I'm just
saying that the activity and blessings of the Buddha are infinite. Buddha may
manifest as a bridge, queen, king, minister, and all kinds of things. These are
called kyewa tulku, 'manifestation of birth', like taking birth as a small insect.
[Q] So does that mean that everything that we see and every experience we
encounter could be the manifestation of the Buddha?
[A] Yes, it could be. I was giving the example of the breeze. Sometimes the
breeze comes and hits you, and you notice and appreciate it. And maybe it's not
only that. Perhaps because of this breeze you may walk to a temple or a
meditation centre, and directly through that you find the path. This can happen,
all just because of a breeze.
[Q] I find it similar to what other teachings call 'taking the result as the path'.
[A] That's Vajrayana dialogue, 'taking the result as the path'.
[Q] Is this also part of the path seeing all experiences as the manifestation of
dharmakaya?
[A] This is a good point, because Vajrayana is the result path, and now we realise
that even in the Mahayana path, the causal path, there's a way to appreciate
things as Buddha's manifestation.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
318



[Q] Why does Maitreya go to the god realm to teach Asanga? He's a tenth bhumi
Bodhisattva, so why does he manifest as a god?
(A) Oh, he has a steady job there! And he's going to come here anyway, so why
hurry?
[Q] Does he just manifest everywhere? Is it easier to teach from the god realm?
Al Yes
[Q] Do we hear better there? Is the communication better there?
(A) To the god beings, he's teaching now. I think these Bodhisattvas, in the
midst of their humility and very wholesome qualities, sometimes they want to
leave a few marks to tell the world they're not that ordinary, so they do other
things. Like when we read Chandrakirti, we somehow feel he's a dry,
argumentative, hopeless, cynical, irritating pandit. But he also milked a painted
cow! I guess they do things like that. It's just my guess. They are all
bodhisattvas, so we don't know.
[Q] I have a question about how karma manifests. Only a Buddha would know all
causes, and within the unique realm of one's mindstream, the appearance of
causes producing effects. For example, let's say I have sex fixation, so I have a
karma or latent tendency of phallic fixation. And because of that latent
tendency, 1 see phalluses wherever I go. So I find myself in Paris and there's the
Eiffel Tower. Is it a case of (a) I have this latent tendency so I'm drawn to come
to Paris ...
(A) What is (a)?
[Q] (a) is that the inner causes, the inner latent tendencies, the karmic
potentiality, the seeds are sitting there and looking for somewhere to project this
apparent appearance, so I'm drawn to Paris.
A] Wait. Where's Louise? Can you listen to this?
(Louise] I'm going to Paris!
[Q] Then I have this perfect apparent object that I can project. Or is it the case
that because of the randomness of karma, I find other causes have drawn me to
Paris, and hence the seed then manifests when I look at the Eiffel Tower. This is
part (a). But we're also told that one doesn't need any of these outer influences,
because I can dream and think of all these things without seeing any Eiffel Tower
anywhere. So how are the causes coming together to make the effects? And the
reason I ask this ...
(A) Oh - you haven't finished?
[Q] The reason is that even though one may not have the awareness to be able to
influence or edit those causes, if you could, it would be that your practice is
working. Everything is mere thought whether there is outer manifestation or not.
(AJ OK. I need a translator for this one! Louise, could you give a summary?
(Louise] I could have this wrong, but if everything is causes and conditions, and
we've got this karma of being obsessed with penises, then something will appear
to us. But you have to see it as a penis, because some other French person
wouldn't even see it as penis-like. They'd just see a big metal structure,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
319



[Q] That wasn't the point of the question. I said it was within the exclusive realm
of my mindstream, not anybody else's mindstream.
[A] I can't see any connection between Eiffel Tower and the rest.
[Q] Why would you go on a pilgrimage if there were no connection with the Eiffel
Tower?
(Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche] I have a good solution - Rinpoche will answer this
one!
(Tulku Jigme Rinpoche] Of course I can't say that I understand the question, as
Rinpoche said that only a Buddha could answer that! But I think I could be safe
by saying I think it could be both. It might be both that your attraction to
phalluses has made you see the Eiffel Tower, or that some other reason might
have brought you to Paris. After all, Paris is not only made of Eiffel Towers, so it
could have been some other thing that attracted you to the vicinity of the Eiffel
Tower, and because it's so protruding, you can't miss it.
[Q] But even without going to Paris, I can still think or dream these things without
any supposedly apparent outer appearance. So these causes resting in the alaya
are coming randomly, but there must be other causes for them to manifest?
[Tulku Jigme Rinpoche] I don't know. I was wondering if it's also possible, just in
the same way that our present dream-like conditions take us to this relative
dream-like Paris, that there might be the same things happening in your double-
dreaming situations. Perhaps the same things arise and it happens that way.
Rinpoche just said it might be due to the influence of the person you're sitting
next to
(Gérard] You're flattering me, Rinpoche!
Effortlessness
[Q] Could I ask about effortlessness? Surely effortlessness is the fruit of
perfection. If you have imperfections and you try to act in a spontaneous way,
you will always tread on people's feet. So when looking at Buddha-nature itself,
and talking about its spontaneous activity, how should a practitioner react to it?
The Uttaratantra is giving us an example, but it's not an example for practice,
surely. It's an example to inspire you to practice.
[A] Yes, that's right. Well of course if it is like a mahasandhi teaching, then they
really have the compete details of how to do that. Although it is on the result
level, when we talk about effortlessness, it's not wrong. In fact it's encouraged
to aim for that, aspire for that, and act according to that, to already get used to
that. For instance, even in the Mahayana, and not only in the Mahayana, but I
would say confidently in all Buddhist meditation methods, there is not a single
meditation method that does not say "not to dwell on the past, not to dwell on
the future, be in the present". There's not a single meditation method in the
whole of Buddhism that does not say that. To dwell on the past, I don't think so!
And that non-dwelling is already effortlessness, already getting used to
effortlessness. And beginners like us put a lot of effort into pursuing
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
320



effortlessness. And all those efforts are worthwhile, because our aim is to
achieve effortlessness.
[Q] So, are we talking about mastery here? When you use the word
'effortlessness', it's like being a violin player. When you get really good, it's
effortless. But a beginner trying to be effortless would sound awful. It's only
when you're a master that you can be effortless
[A] I guess for the time being you could put it that way.
[Q] I have a question about the impartiality of the Buddha's compassion. I see a
contradiction. You said that Buddha gives to beings as they need and as they
want, and he knows what all beings need and want at very time and in all
conditions. But at the same time he has no intention to help, so I find it difficult
to understand how the rain falls indiscriminately on all the beings. I thought the
Buddha's compassion was like a reflection, and you need beings and Buddhas for
that to function. In that case his compassion is in response to beings' needs.
But here it seems that whether or not they want the rain, they're going to get it.
(A) It's not about whether they want it or not, but whether they are able to receive
it.
[Q] So it will rain down and the question is whether they will receive it?
[A] Yes, it's up to their merit. It's about whether their lapis lazuli is cleaned or
not.
[Q] What about the expression kangla kangdül?
(A) It works very well here. As you clean the lapis lazuli, the reflection gives you
the entire path, whatever is required.
IQ] Yes, but in the example of the rain that is the downpour of Buddha's
compassion, is that helping to clean the lapis lazuli?
[A] Yes, it does. But why do you think there's intention necessary?
[Q] So the compassion will be appropriate to each and every being and their
situation.
A] But it's your Buddha that's reflecting (rangsem sangyey). It's your own mind
that is the Buddha reflecting there.
[Q] So who's giving the teaching?
AJ On which level? Are we talking about the reflection or the rain?
[Q] The rain.
(A) When we are talking about the rain, then yes, we have to say that Buddha is
giving the teaching. It's difficult, like when you're looking at a mirror and trying
to put on lipstick. You can't really say that face in the mirror is yours, and at the
same time you also can't say that it's not yours. Somehow there is a benefit,
because if it were not for that reflection in the mirror, you might end up putting
lipstick on your eyes or something. It works like that, and the reflection in the
mirror doesn't have any wish to direct your hand to the right spot. The path
works like that too. It has to be like that, because if part of this system fails,
then Buddhism will become theistic. You know, when these Vajrayana people
talk about guru they use this lapis lazuli example, and it really works.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
321



View and Path
Blessings & genuine heart of sadness
[Q] What is a blessing?
[A] Blessing is jinlab, where jin means 'splendour' or 'quality' and lab is
'transformation', so basically we are talking about revealing the gold, the honey
and all of that. Blessing is revealing that.
[Q] So it isn't active?
IA) What do you mean? Do you mean the gold coin is not active?
[Q] I was referring to the revealing.
[A] Yes, there's not so much motivation. Most of us don't even know we have
lost it. Most of us don't even know we have a hole in our pocket. You've
brought up a good point. You know how sometimes we think that something is
wrong, like some kind of depression? We don't know what's wrong. We feel
something is lacking. You know, it's been breakfast for 42 years, lunch for 42
years, dinner for 42 years, 6000 changes of t-shirt, 600 changes of jeans - all
this and still something is lacking! You feel something is missing. It's almost
like you know you were carrying a gold coin and now suddenly you feel that your
pocket is a little light. Buddhists, especially people like Jamgön Kongtrül, talk
about kyoshey, which is a very special kind of sadness. It's supposedly the gold
coin knocking at your door saying, "Hey! Did you realise you lost me?" Certain
kinds of depression, though not all of them, are supposedly good examples of
why we have Buddha-nature. It's like when there's a fire inside the oven and you
feel the heat outside. Buddha-nature is saying something to you, but most
ordinary people don't know what it is, so instead they surrender to Three Jewels
of a very different kind: LSD, marijuana and Prozac!
Here we are discussing the sadness that Trungpa Rinpoche refers to as the
"genuine heart of sadness". It's like the fourth stanza in chapter 6 of the
Madhyamakavatara, which describes what happens when people hear about
emptiness:
6:4 Even an ordinary being may, when hearing of emptiness,
Repeatedly feel immense joy surging within,
Bringing forth tears that moisten his eyes,
And making the hairs on his body quiver.
Some people will have tears in their eyes, goose bumps and great joy. That joy
could be this same sadness. Some kinds of depression could also be a certain
type of sadness, like when we have the feeling that something is not enough. It
could also be something else. We usually have ego and pride, and this pride is
like a rope that binds us. It binds us so tightly that it chokes us. And sometimes
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
322



through our practice, this binding, that pride, gets broken. And when the pride
is damaged or broken, then there is a sense of relaxation because the binding
has been broken, and some people might think that is also that kyoshey, that
sadness that we were talking about.
IQ] You talked about how ego is like a lasso or rope that binds us, and how the
genuine heart of sadness is like this rope breaking. Could you explain this?
(A) We were talking about kyoshey. Ironically, the fact that we know to harm
others is one reason that we can have compassion. The logic is that if you know
how to harm someone, that means you know what harm is. You know it is
something that you don't want for yourself, but instead you want it for others
that you don't like. We are saying that if you are dealing with a person who
knows how to harm, then he is someone inegotiable' so to speak. Someone who
doesn't know about harming others cannot be taught compassion. This is a little
bit difficult to express.
Q] And that is the lasso that the Dharma breaks?
[A] It is like a vessel. Let me give you an example. Let's suppose you are very
angry person who really harms others, and I'm here to teach you about love and
compassion. It's very difficult to teach you, so I do exactly to you what you do to
others. And when you feel the pain, I ask you if that's what you want. And if you
don't want that pain, you can start to see that others also don't want it. So
you're negotiable. I can deal with you. Now let's say that you are from Jupiter,
where beating another person is a form of greeting. Although there's a lot of
pain, you don't think about it like that. So as a human being, I cannot talk to
you. How would I begin? You need a teacher from Jupiter! So that's what 1
mean. If someone understands harm, it basically means they have a mind or
cognition. Because of this, we say that all sentient beings are objects of
compassion because, after all, we should have a purpose when we are sending
compassion. You don't just send compassion without anyone to send it to!
[Q] I'd like to ask about disgust towards samsara. I think it can lead some people
to an incorrect understanding, where instead of taking refuge in the Buddha, they
take refuge in doing nothing. They ask their teachers if they can stay in Dharma
centres, as then they don't have to be stained by samsara. For me, that's a very
easy way of acting, and these people are less prosperous than they would be if
they developed their capacity in samsara. I am a fashion designer, and for a long
time my designs were very complicated, and finally I realised that simplicity is the
best. Now I'm prosperous, but I had to suffer for a long time, in order to be able
to work less afterwards. So isn't it necessary to know samsara very well in order
to reach nirvana?
(A) If you want to learn about samsara, you have to study and practice Dharma.
That's the only way, because the samsaric teachers will never teach you about
samsara. They will teach you all kinds of hallucinations. You have to practice
hearing, contemplation and meditation, and you'll understand more and more
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
323



about samsara, and eventually you'll realise the meaning of Nagarjuna's famous
words: "there is no samsara, and that is nirvana".
[Q] if we all have Buddha-nature inherent within us, why do we need blessings?
[A] We talked about blessing before. It is more about revealing or receiving.
[Q] Protection has an aspect of clarity. If there is no defiled nature in reality, then
it might seem that if you have a complaint then you're the problem. But what
about a sense of clarity or protection that says no, this is enough? How does that
fit in?
(A) In the path, it all fits in.
How does prayer work?
[Q] I don't understand how prayer works. When you pray for someone who is
sick, that person already has a certain number of causes and conditions, karma,
which will bring a result. Either they will be cured, or get worse or die. So what
do you do when you pray for that person? Do you add another cause?
A) Yes.
[Q] And whether it's stronger or weaker, it makes it possible to have a result?
[A] Yes, prayer is a very big cause. And another is whether the person has the
merit to be cured from the disease. There are many levels. Let's say someone is
sick, and has great karma to recover, but he needs several things. Let's say he
needs some vitamins, medicine, and all kinds of treatment, but that one
important cause for his recovery is prayer, especially a prayer from certain
beings. And if he has the merit, that prayer will work. That's on the ideal level.
It could also be that someone is sick, and nothing can cure him, but he has
enough karma to have someone pray so that all his negativity comes together so
to speak. Then although he will not really recover from the sickness, he will
exhaust the karma. Only the Lord of Speech can teach all these subtle
movements of karma.
As a Mahayana practitioner, bodhicitta is so important. And that comprises both
relative and ultimate bodhicitta. They are equally important. But for ordinary
beings like us, ultimate bodhicitta is difficult. That's what Longchenpa said,
anyway. But there is something that we can do, based on our ability and our
capacity. We should really try to emphasise relative bodhicitta. And within
relative bodhicitta there's aspiration and application. And of course both are
important, but application is difficult. We have no wisdom, no ability, no money,
and no time But what we can do is aspiration bodhicitta So for beginners ke
us, we can do aspiration bodhicitta. It's economical and it's really beneficial.
Because by doing aspiration bodhicitta, the first thing that happens is that you
become kind.
Patrul Rinpoche talks a lot about kindness. What makes a person kind is having a
good aspiration (mönlam). When you do prayers, especially when you do prayers
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers 324



for others, they are not only a seed, but also already the shoot and the flower of
kindness. And when you have kindness, you will have love and compassion, and
then every enlightened quality will come. It will be like during the monsoon time,
which is during the summer, when water bursts out from all kinds of places.
Everywhere is wet. Likewise, even if you don't want them, all the enlightened
qualities will just happen. That's why Tsele Natsol Rangdrol said, "There are
many people who know how to be kind, but not so many people who understand
about aspiration". I think aspiration is really important.
[Q] Sometimes prayer works, but obviously sometimes it does not. I've never
quite understood the mechanism by which prayer works. Could you please say a
few words about that and relate that to the teachings on the Uttaratantra shastra?
A] There's a difference between dedication and prayers. Dedication is
something that you have done, a good deed, which you then dedicate. For prayer
or aspiration, it doesn't matter whether you've done it, you're going to do it, or
you are doing it. You do this for a certain aim. Based on the Uttaratantra
shastra, 1 think you could say that prayer is cleaning the lapis lazuli.
Uttaratantra and the Vajrayana
[Q] You quoted the Buddha saying that the absolute can only be realised through
faith. But I think there's some doubt about whether the Buddha really existed as
we do. And when you mentioned the story of Guru Rinpoche, 1 kind of find it
hard to see how to bridge the gap between us. Everything seems to be so
remote. I'm trying to find a way to relate to these stories
[A] You mean stories of Guru Rinpoche and the Buddha and stuff like that?
[Q] Yes,
(A) That's why the spiritual companion (gewe shenyen) is important, the guru if
you like. Because right now he or she is the only person you can relate to.
Things like 'lotus born' and 'antelope-like calves' are a little bit difficult. So it's
good to have someone who likes pizzas, someone who yawns but not always,
someone who yawns nicely. An extraordinary yawn!
[Q] So even though you're trying to teach the class strictly Mahayana, you can't
really avoid the Vajrayana?
[A] No, this they have even in the Mahayana. Actually I'm sure the Vajrayana got
it from here. You know the Mahayana's reverence to the guru, my goodness. At
the end of the Prajñaparamita-sutra there is the story of the Bodhisattva
Sadaprarudita “Always Weeping" (Taktungu in Tibetan). His story is amazing.
Someone should translate it. I don't think the Vajrayana people have those kinds
of stories.
[Q] The text is called the Uttaratantra, but it seems to me that the Shentongpas
practice something very similar to the atiyoga, which is a Vajrayana practice
(A) Rangtongpas also do atiyoga, I think.
[Q] is this Vajrayana?
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
325



[A] This is Mahayana. This can be explained as Vajrayana, Jamgön Kongtrul
Lodro Thayé did it, and I think the Kagyupas did it.
[Q] What would be the main difference between a Mahayana and a Vajrayana
explanation of this text?
[A] I don't know! I think in the Vajrayana you can talk about all these things
based on prana, bindu and nadi. Therefore they can talk about it in terms of the
primordially existing mandala. And you know for the Vajrayana, they'll say that
other beings must be understood as deities because of Buddha-nature. And this
is why Jamgön Kongtrül Rinpoche said if you eat one grape with the pride of a
deity, that is equal merit to servicing 10,000 Buddhas from the 10,000 directions
for 10,000 years. This is all Vajrayana bragging! And also the time is different.
Here in the Mahayana, time is the actual time as we think of it, but in the
Vajrayana time is very much based on the movement of sun and moon. It's not
really the outside sun and moon. Actually the outside sun and moon are only
there because there is a sun and moon inside. Basically whatever is outside
exists inside. They are just a reflection of what's inside. So for instance, you
know we generally say the tenth day is Guru Rinpoche day so we have to do isok,
like we're celebrating some kind of anniversary. But actually, at that time, the
movement of the inner moon and sun is passing through a certain channel. And
at that time if you can do things that are not interfered with by inhibitions, such
as partaking of the substance of bala and stuff like that. If you can take a plate
of shit and a plate of salad and you don't blink your eyes, if you see no difference
between them. Basically the whole practice is a bit like a trumpet. There's a
trumpet that's like the nadi, and then a wind that is like the prana that goes
through the trumpet, and there is a blower. But right now our trumpet is so
rusty! There are lots of defilements, lots of clinging to the self, and lots of
obscurations - outer, inner and secret obscurations. So because of all that we
need to straighten and clear this trumpet. Stuff like that. All I've been telling
you is half true and half exaggerated, so you shouldn't take any of this part
seriously. That's it.
[Q] If you're doing your practice, and everything becomes sambhogakaya, a pure
realm and it's not a mind trip, but it actually falls away, and suddenly it's Guru
Rinpoche ...
[A] Are you talking about Vajrayana?
[Q] What else? Anyway, if this happens, and everything really becomes this, what
happens for that to become dharmakaya? Is it just recognition? Or is there still
more purification, even though suddenly it's Guru Rinpoche and all these dakinis
and everything. What makes it dharmakaya?
[Q] You are talking about Vajrayana! I guess Vajrayana has lots of methods to
invoke dharmakaya.
[Q] What if it actually becomes this? It's not that you're sitting on your cushion
and practicing and then you stop and have a cup of coffee. What happens it this
actually becomes reality? How would it then become dharmakaya?
[A] Then you're already there.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
326



[Q] It is dharmakaya at that point.
[A] They're inseparable. That's what the text says.
Why does the path have two accumulations?
[Q] If the main paradox is that even that which is primordially pure is
accompanied by temporary defilements, is that the reason why in human
existence the path is geared towards clearing the defilements instead of
preventing them?
(A) Yes, you could say that. It's not about prevention, as we're too late!
Although one could abandon and purify our old habits, and that could be
referred as prevention.
[Q] If the qualities of the Buddha are established in Buddha-nature, why are there
two accumulations? Surely there should be only one accumulation, namely
purification of defilements. Why is there any need to accumulate merit at all?
[A] They are actually one. The lamas, they want their disciples to work hard, so
it's divided into two! It's really like that in a way, I'm not joking! Maybe I'm half
joking. Cleaning the window is not other than the appearance the clean window.
When we talk about accumulation, there's accumulation of merit and
accumulation of wisdom. The accumulation of merit is a sort of relative path, but
it's a very important path, because it gives you a certain ability and strength. Are
you a Rangtongpa, by the way? Because they talk like that!
[Q] But the text talks about the two accumulations. Why does Maitreya talk about
the accumulation of merit?
[A] Because there is a path. That's the only reason.
[Q] It's path language?
[A] Yes. I think the Rangtongpas talk just like you! They say if the qualities are
already there, why do we need to accumulate anything? Longchenpa's answer is
that the entire path is to purify the defilements. But sometimes it's nice to think
that we're cleaning the window, rather than just cleaning the dirt! Sometimes it's
nice to think we're making something, producing a clean window rather than just
cleaning the dirt!
[Q] Why?
(A) There are many reasons! You can keep the window, whereas you have to
abandon the dirt. It's very soothing to hear that you can keep something, and
that's why there are words like obtaining or achieving (tobpa). How would it
sound if all the Buddhist prayers only talked about cutting things down, cleaning,
and so on? That's not as encouraging!
[Q] So when you are accumulating merit from the perspective of elimination, what
does that mean? That seems to me extraordinarily fruitful, because the
accumulation of merit sounds like spiritual materialism, where you build things
for benefit. It doesn't sound like liberating at all. Much accumulation is not
liberating. I feel that people are being trapped by accumulation. So what you
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
327



just said is immensely fruitful. How can you accumulate from the perspective of
elimination?
(A) Because you already have it. So the only thing that you have to do is
eliminate.
[Q] I'd like to ask this as a path question rather than a view question. How do
you accumulate from the perspective of elimination? Because if you accumulate
from the perspective of accumulation, you're not causing liberation, you're
causing samsara. You're becoming wealthy spiritually, and that accumulation
cannot be a cause of liberation.
(A) Let's go back to the glass. When you wash the dirt, what is your motivation?
Is it just to wash the dirt? Don't you care about the clean window? I think you
are doing it to accumulate or construct the clean window. When you are giving,
engaging in acts of generosity, then you are purifying or eliminating miserliness.
When you are chanting mantras, you are eliminating the defilements of the
prana, and that is not other than accumulating your prana as vajra speech. As we
explained this morning, they are like the sun and its rays. I guess you can
choose one, but you will be doing both. Even with purification, like Vajrasattva,
you still accumulate mantras. Basically accumulation is like improving a power or
ability, and accumulating the power means eliminating the weakness.
[Q] You said that the activity of the Buddha is somehow dependent on the
aspiration of the Bodhisattva during the path. It sounds to me more like a result
of achievement, rather than a result of elimination. It sounds a little bit
compounded.
(A) It's the same. Elimination is an achievement.
[Q] Elimination is the achievement of freedom. But I understood that somehow
the aspiration is necessary, it helps to create something.
[A] When we talk about 'achievement', we're saying you cannot create this. It's
not as though you didn't have the Buddha qualities before and then you
somehow add them in. It's not like you add a lock of hair for each month that
you're accumulating merit! We can't do that. You cannot create the Buddha's
quality. It's all there already. But you can eliminate the defilements that block it,
and then you will see it.
Defilements, emotions & the origin of suffering
[Q]{Gérard} I didn't understand the symbolism of the young man and the
elephant. It seems that the young man is staring out of the window, and then
suddenly he sees a beautiful elephant, although you didn't mention that the
elephant is female.
Al You didn't know?
[Q]{Gérard} Perhaps that young man didn't clean the window well enough! Now,
when we consider that love for the elephant, or the feeling that you have of
missing the Buddha-nature, are these of the same nature of human love? Does
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
328



that pure love, that longing for the Buddha-nature, have the same nature as
ordinary love, human love? Can ordinary love be used on the path? Can it lead
to the final love, total love?
[A] The love for the elephant?
[Q]{Gérard} Any kind of love! The love of men for women and women for men, or
universal love, the love of sentient beings!
[A] First of all, you're admitting that you are vigorous!
[Q]{Gérard} I don't have to admit anything! This is Madhyamika. You've got to
prove something!
[A] This question about love is a dangerous one! As we said before, our human
understanding of what harms people and what benefits them is like a sign, or
perhaps we should say, it's like the radiance or light of the Buddha-nature
manifesting. In this sense, 1 you can say that it is the same with love. But in
regard to the young man and the elephant, there's something kinky about that
kind of love! You used the words "young" and "female elephant", so it sounds
like it involves a lot of panting!
[Q]{Gérard} That is your perception!
[A] Well, if you do have that kinky kind of love, then you definitely need to clean
your window better! Because I heard that this elephant is actually half man,
especially the lower part
[Q]{Gérard} But Rinpoche, you just said that all emotions are wisdom!
[A] Well, I have to say that your emotion is a mould. I'm not judging here. By all
means have fun with this half-man, half-woman elephanti Because after all, this
is all the mould, and who cares about the mould, as long as we can get the
statue? We should be careful with the mould until we have the statue, but once
we have the statue, it doesn't matter. And it looks like you have a very good
mould!
[Q] When it is said that the emotions are the origin of wisdom, it sounds like what
you were saying before when we were looking at the qualities of Buddha-nature
like bliss and permanence, and you said that this 'bliss' is beyond bliss and non-
bliss. Surely we would never say that the Buddha-nature is beyond good and
evil, would we? Because we talk about Buddha-nature having qualities that are
perfected, like the Buddha's tongue is the perfection of our tongue. We always
talk in terms of virtue. We would never say that Buddha has transcendent hatred
or non-bliss, we'd always say transcendent bliss.
[A] Let's take words like virtue (gewa), excellence (zangpo), and peace (shiwa).
Even on a very mundane level, virtue is considered to refer to something that will
soothe you, and remove your pain. And when we talk about the Buddha-nature
being virtue, I guess we have to talk about its effect of removing the extremes,
because the extremes are the pain. So yes, many times we talk about Buddha-
nature as virtue in the sense of removing all the pain of the extremes. But as we
said earlier, if we were to say this in more of a Madhyamika style, we might say it
is beyond virtue and non-virtue, which has the same meaning.
[Q] Don't the tantras talk of supreme hatred, or supreme anger?
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
329



(A) It's the same. But now we're touching tantra, so maybe we should discuss
this some other time.
[Q] is enlightenment an emotion?
(A) Basically, even Buddha-nature is a label, and we have to use labels, because
we are on the path, and that is the best we can do. As long as it has all the
qualities that Maitreya is stating here, we can call it whatever we like:
enlightenment, god nature, or whatever.
[Q] When you talk about elimination, could we say that to really eliminate you
need to recognise? For example, if we are aware of being selfish, "1, 1, 1", is that a
small realisation, like a seed that's growing in the earth? Or is realisation only
possible when the seed is fully grown and flourished.
(A) "1, 1, 1" - like admitting we have ego? I think admitting that we have ego, pride
and all these negative emotions is already a very good step. When the seed is
fully grown, that's enlightenment. What you need in the beginning is to know
that you have the seed. As I said at the beginning, you need to know that the
defilements are removable (drima dralrung). That's a very good understanding. I
would not call it a realisation, but that understanding alone does many good
things, and it will make samsara easy to disintegrate.
[Q] Why is the wrapping evidence of Buddha-nature?
[A] Just go back to the reasons for the Three Jewels. The four paradoxes give a
very good answer. The paradox is this - you have the Buddha-nature, and even
all the Buddha qualities, but they are not apparent, because you are wrapped by
defilements. And then there is a motivation to clear the defilements. Why is
there that motivation? Because you think something is wrong. All these are the
characteristics of the rig, the kham that we have been talking about.
[Q] We read statements like 'thoughts are dharmakaya even when wrapped in
afflicted emotions'. How does such a statement fit in the system described here
in the Uttaratantra shastra?
[A] Not so much, as I'm explaining the Uttaratantra-shastra more in the sutra
way at the moment. But if I would explain it based on Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö
Thayé's commentary, then this would fit very well.
[Q] When we speak of beginningless time and temporary emotions, is there a
contradiction?
[A] You have a Rangtongpa tendency! I guess there are many ways to answer this.
When we talk about the beginning (togma), we are talking about ultimate truth.
And ultimately, the emotions do not exist, because they don't have beginning,
middle and end - all the usual Madhyamika analysis applies here. This is what I
was talking about earlier, about how the last example of the mould and the
statue really complements mahasandhi. Based on that, we have quotes like "one
hundred emotions, one hundred wisdoms" and so on, based on the ultimate
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
330



level. But when we talk about temporary or adventitious (loburwa), then we are
talking about the path. We are talking about the relative truth. Because when we
talk about togma, we are talking about ultimate truth. If you say there is a
beginning of an emotion, then there is a truly existing emotion. That's why
emotions are temporary.
[Q] But when you say beginningless, it could be understood that they have always
been there.
(A] We say that it exists from the beginningless time, but that's the only way to
talk when you try to unite the relative and ultimate truth, isn't it?
[Q] Isn't the difficulty coming from the translation of loburwa as 'temporary'? It
doesn't mean temporary, it means adventitious. It means that it's not part of the
thing that it's appearing with. It's temporary because it's adventitious, isn't it?
(A) Maybe the word 'temporary' is not good. The word loburwa has that
connotation of 'it's not that'. But when we talk about defilements, we're talking
about the path. We have to. How can we talk about the baby before the womb?
You have to talk about them as co-emergent (Thenkyey). Now we're talking about
a pregnant woman. I think our problem is that we don't understand the meaning
of elimination or liberation (dralwa). This is so difficult to understand. There is
nothing to liberate, and that is the liberation. Actually, the fact that there is
nothing to liberate is a big part of why it's removable (drima dralrung).
[Q] Just as we say there is no beginning to the defilements, presumably we can
also say there is no end to them. So it's not like they're going to go away, as you
said earlier. So liberation is just realising they weren't there in the first place.
[A] In this regard, yes. If you reach liberation, then, yes, of course there is no
end to it. But relatively and individually, there is an end to defilements. Even
though relatively and individually, there is no beginning to them.
IQ] How can that be?
[A] The relative is like that, as I was saying! It's completely irrational, so don't
analyse too much! When we talk purely from the Buddha-nature's point of view,
there is no beginning, and therefore there is no end. But as soon as we talk
about confusion about the Buddha-nature, then we are talking about a path.
That's relative truth. There is no such thing as all sentient beings one day
unwrapping everything, which would be the end of samsara. There is no such
thing as that, the big end, because then you are talking about ultimate truth
again. But individually, someone like Gérard Godet can practice, unwrap, and
then experience the relative end. But that's only on the relative level. And that's
how it is. That's a good understanding now! Basically, there is the logic of
cause, condition and effect. And then there is Buddha-nature, beyond cause,
condition and effect. But to think about or talk about these two together is
difficult! On the one hand, we were talking about pre-dirty and pre-clean. And
on the other hand, after it is dirty, post-dirt, then we can also talk about the
clean, because there is dirt.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
331



[Q] If we've already been enlightened since beginningless time, and all emotions
are impermanent, why did all this suffering start? Why are we not already
enlightened, and having as much fun as the Buddhas?
[A] Because the baby hasn't come out. We're still pregnant. That gold coin
hasn't been found. Isn't that what you're asking?
[Q] I'm asking why all this confusion started. If enlightenment has been there
since beginningless time, why did all the suffering start?
(A) We're talking about the beginning, which is a very difficult question. The
beginning is the problem again, because then we have to talk about the absolute
beginning of suffering, and you will have the consequence that it is a permanent,
independent phenomenon. And if it is truly existent, then we cannot abandon it.
If there is a beginning to suffering, then it becomes something independent, a
truly existing defilement, and so you cannot abandon it. Actually, I guess that
this is something that we have to meditate about. The Buddha was asked that
same question, and he answered by not saying anything. It's one of the fourteen
questions that he answered by not saying anything. Because the moment that
you say anything, then it becomes a concept, a phenomenon. These questions
are seeking to use the ultimate means and logic to find a relative answer. All the
questions that have to do with the origin or the beginning are all analytical, and
all belong to the time of establishing the ultimate truth. And when you do that,
then all the conventional truth is dismantled. It doesn't exist. It's like saying to
a mundane person, “these are nails, this is flesh, this is blood - 50 where's my
hand?" You cannot really talk like that, but it's a path that you can practice, and
then get rid of the attachment to the phenomenon called 'hand', because you will
realise that it doesn't exist. And time is also like that. I guess the question is
coming more from some kind of amazement at partially knowing a little bit of
interdependent reality. Everything is so interdependent, and when you really
establish this interdependent logic on the subtlest level, it really pokes a lot of
holes in this rational world. We like to think that we're modern, we're advanced,
we're scientists, everything is interdependent, and everything has causes and
conditions, and so on. But we still have a habitual pattern that likes to believe
that there are certain things that are permanent and not interdependent.
[Q] I have a question about when this confusion starts. Couldn't we just say it
starts now, as now we have the ability to recognise Buddha-nature or fail to do
So, so there's no beginning.
[A] I think you can say that, because after all, when we say 'beginning' or 'end',
we can only talk about now. When we say 'yesterday', we are talking about it
now. We're talking about our idea of yesterday. We cannot bring yesterday back
and then talk about it. Whenever we talk about time, it's difficult to understand,
because time is the biggest, most deluded and yet most pervasive confusion that
we have! Even how time affects you on the relative level, one hour can be very
long, or it can be very short. It's such a relative thing.
IQ] Is it all habit? Is there anything we learn that's new?
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
332



[A] The old ones are past, gone. I cannot say that they don't come back.
However, for my ears it works better to say that everything we know is new. For
example, when you think about what happened yesterday, you can't bring back
yesterday to think about it
[Q] But this tent was here yesterday, which is how I recognise it.
(A) But you're doing that now.
[Q] Yes, but I know I'm here because of yesterday.
[A] But you are not going to yesterday's tent.
[Q] No, but I recognise it, so I know I'm here, because I experience it before.
[A] That's fine, but the fact is you are not going inside yesterday's tent. And on
top of that, yesterday's you has also gone.
[Q] But don't we learn everything from past memory?
(A) Haven't you watched Terminator 3? We learn from the future too! The future
is very important. I think it's more important than the past. Who cares about the
past? Of course, though, the present is the most important, isn't it?
[Q] Don't we need to remember yesterday's teachings?
[A] I was just teasing her!
[Q] When you're born, do you recognise your mother from the experience of your
body and hers, or from karmic memory?
(A] All together.
[Q] What, technically, are the obscurations nyomjuki dripa?
(A) They are samten shi, the four samadhis without insight wisdom meditation.
You could put it this way. If you have only shamatha and no vipashyana, you will
manage to have a really stable mind, a mind that is absolutely under your
control. And also your body, if you go through the perfection of the body
(shinjang). And the highest result of the shamatha is amazing. It looks identical
to enlightenment, because all the gross thoughts and defilements have been
suppressed. But the gross thoughts and defilements are only 'sleeping' or latent,
and that is really dangerous. Likewise, you can even practice vipashyana one-
sidedly, motivated only by wanting to get out of samsara. Then you might place
a lot of emphasis on wisdom, especially the wisdom to defeat the defilements.
And because that's your aim, you might not really be bothered about defeating
the cognitive obscurations. So basically you have no compassion. The great
compassion is not really necessary to escape from samsara, and you can really
reach that state and remain there a long time. And you'll never go back to
samsara, that's for sure, because you've destroyed all the causes of samsara. So
you'll remain in that state. You might wonder why is there a problem with that?
It sounds good, especially if you can attain it within three lifetimes! And you
don't have to cut your limbs or anything. This is a really good example of how
our limited mind cannot conceive of things, because if you understand it on a
higher level, that state has a lot of suffering. It's not the suffering of birth, old
age, sickness or death that we know. But there are two kinds of suffering: the
suffering of change, and all-pervasive suffering. When we talk about the
Buddha's compassion, most of us think about it in terms of having some kind of
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
333



sympathy towards people who have pain. But that compassion is not uncommon
compassion. Hindus and even Islam talk about this kind of compassion. But the
compassion that has no aim, the non-dualistic compassion, that's exclusive to
Mahayana Buddhism.
[Q] Why do the Arhats have the suffering of change? Or did you just mean that
they have all-pervasive suffering?
[A] They definitely have all-pervasive suffering, because they're supposed to be
woken up. And there are other examples of suffering, like how Maudgalyana was
beaten up, or how Shariputra didn't know whether the layman Palchey had the
merit to become a monk or not, things like that.
[Q] But I thought Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas renounce the suffering of
change when the see the qualities of the higher realms?
[A] I have to check this. My mind is not clear on this one. But they definitely
have all-pervasive suffering, the first suffering. I think this is explained quite
well in the Madhyamakavatara right at the beginning. Even the tenth bhumi
Bodhisattva's meditative state is suffering. Even they are objects of compassion,
because they still have clinging to marks or characteristics (tsenma).
[Q] We talked about removing emotional veils. How do we remove cognitive
veils?
[A] The whole Mahayana path concentrates on that. It's what makes the
Mahayana Mahayana.
[Q] I don't understand this thing that is primordially pure and temporarily
cleaned. I don't understand this "temporary".
[A] The defilements are temporary.
[Q] Does it have any connection with this lapis lazuli floor?
[A] Yes, because the lapis lazuli has defilements that need to be cleaned.
[Q] Does "temporary" mean that you can clean the dirt but it will come back?
[A] No, it just means that the dirt is not the lapis lazuli. It's a separate entity.
[Q] But if you say it is temporarily cleaned, that means it will get dirty again.
[A] When we talk about enlightenment, we are talking about two kinds of
enlightenment. They are actually one, but one is the real one, the ultimate
enlightenment that is primordially pure and all of that. The other one is what we
talk about in reference to the path. We practice and meditate, and so we clean
the dirt, the removable temporary defilements.
[Q] When you make the distinction between the pre-clean window and the
cleaned window, logically if you talk about pre-cleaned it's also pre-dirty. It's as
separate from the cleaned as it is from the dirt. Yet there is some kind of
similarity between cleaned and pre-cleaned, which there isn't between pre-
cleaned and dirt. We have clean in contrast with dirt, and although Buddha
nature is beyond this distinction, we say it's clean.
[A] Yes, for the sake of communication, we say it's clean
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
334



[Q] Why?
(A) When you talk about pre-clean, there is no dirt.
[Q] But if you say Buddha nature is beyond all distinctions, including those
between clean and dirty, why do we say it's clean? Why should virtue be
preferable to non-virtue?
IA] Actually, it isn't! I think I would dare to say this! During the path, when we
talk about virtue, we are referring to something auspicious and without pain, so i
guess we prefer the word 'virtue'. This is mentioned so often. For example,
right at the beginning of the Bodhicharyavatara there's a verse about the
blessings of the Buddha and the merit of sentient beings:
1:5
As when a flash of lightning rends the night,
And in its glare shows all the dark black clouds had hid,
Likewise rarely, through the Buddhas' power,
Virtuous thoughts arise, brief and transient, in the world.
As I think we discussed, let's say you're a child from a family where there has
been no religion for seven generations. But you still have the ethic that you
should not cheat or steal, and even if you don't have that ethic, you don't like it
when it happens to you. So where does this disliking come from? I think the
Theravadins stress this non-religious, non-cultural, non-traditional ethic or
morality a lot. They call it "shame and fear of wrong-doing". This is like a
reflection of Buddha-nature, and all this sounds like Buddha nature is virtuous,
so that's how you have to understand it. But this virtue is not really a traditional
or cultural virtue. It's like an aimless virtue or burden-less virtue. It's virtue
without foreplay.
IQ] Isn't non-virtue linked to attachment to hope?
[A] Generally, as Chandrakirti said, "those who are unwise engage in non-
virtuous actions and go to hell. Those who are unwise engage in virtuous actions
and go to heaven. And those who are wise transcend virtuous and non-virtuous
actions and attain liberation". This applies very much here. But if you're in a
Vajrayana community, they will almost say, “Everything is Buddha nature"
[Q] Are non-virtuous actions bound to belief in ego?
[A] Yes. Basically, something non-virtuous is inauspicious and creates pain. This
is why in the Mahayana, they believe there are only three auspicious things that
happened in this world: the fact that the Buddha came, that he taught, and that
there was a Sangha, people who appreciated his teaching. And this is because
auspiciousness is judged or measured based on how much the situation is going
against this primordially non-existing dirt. It's difficult. In Buddhism, you have
to say the dirt does not exist in reality. And Buddhists don't only say that, they
even dare to say that the path that clears away this dirt, the medicine that cures
the disease, is not real. The whole process of healing does not exist. It's like
looking at a fire ring. There is no fire ring. You just see it because there are
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
335



certain conditions, such as someone who is moving a fire very quickly. As soon
as one of those causes stops, for example if the person holding the fire breaks
his wrist, that's the end of the fire ring.
[Q] So auspiciousness is measured by how much a situation goes against this
primordially non-existing dirt?
[A] Any act or motivation that goes against these temporary defilements is
interpreted as auspiciousness.
[Q] A few days ago you said that virtuous action. But we have to ensure our view,
meditation and action are complementary, so if the final view is beyond all views,
wouldn't it also mean that there is no distinction between virtuous and non-
virtuous actions?
[A] That's true. But the way we define virtue, especially in Mahayana Buddhism,
is something that does not create suffering. Basically bliss. And the path of no
extremes and no characteristics really will free you from pain. So this is why you
can say emptiness is the highest virtue.
[Q] When we have the merit to attend teachings and see the teachers on this lapis
lazuli floor, it's great, but as you said, for mere talk we like to find fault in the
best things. We see the reflections, but we say, "It's OK, but they're upside
down". We always get these kinds of obstacles. What can we do about that?
[A] You just have to clean! Generate merit and clean the lapis lazuli again and
again.
[Q] You were talking about karmic payback and the ass-kissing thing. So if
someone said to me "You look really gorgeous" or "you're a great tarot reader",
and I'm trying to be humble so I say “no, I'm rubbish, I'm crap", I'm basically
denying my Buddha-nature. Is that a denial? Is that creating a future where I'm
basically going to end up complimenting them all the time?
A] Well, it's good to be humble. That's already cleaning a bit of your lapis lazuli.
But if you're humble and just pretending, then that might create a subtle, non-
obvious but very stubborn gooey kind of dirt on your lapis lazuli.
[Q] Could trying to be humble, which would be a bit pretending to be humble,
couldn't that be better than just letting yourself be really proud? Couldn't being
pretentiously humble be at least a start?
JA] That's good.
[Q] If somebody were genuinely spontaneous, would nobody feel like they'd had
their toes trodden on, or would that depend on people's merit?
(A) Generally, they won't step on people's toes and if they did, it would benefit
them.
[Q] If we're all Buddhas from the very beginning, how can we tread on anyone's
toes?
(A) OK. You have to realise that everyone is the Buddha from the beginning.
That's the whole thing. We haven't realised it. Because of the dirt on the lapis
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
336



lazuli, that's why there are people's toes, and that's why we step on them. What
you are saying is a bit like this: if it's only a reflection, then why should I try to
become like that, like a reflection? But the thing is you don't know it's a
reflection
Are there other sentient beings?
[Q] I have heard from a khenpo that the appearance of other sentient beings is
our projection, but their mind stream is not?
[A] This is tricky! When you think out someone else's mind stream, that's your
projection, but relatively of course we have to say that other person has a mind
stream, separate from you.
[Q] If i have understood correctly, enlightenment is the end of samsara and the
liberation of all sentient beings. The moment we are enlightened, we stop seeing
different beings, so we call this liberation of all sentient beings. But if this is
correct, then how is it that after the enlightenment of all the historical Buddhas, 1
am still not enlightened?
(A) For an enlightened being, there is not even the notion of sentient beings, so
there is no enlightened being. There's no notion of time. As soon as we talk
about somebody getting enlightened 2,500 years ago, or some other people who
are trying to get enlightened 2,500 years later, then we are talking about time,
space, and relative truth. From that point of view, yes, we do have some people
who are enlightened and some people who are not. This is why I always have
doubts about whether I really want enlightenment or not. If I were to achieve
enlightenment, then I could never enjoy a detective film. Because the whole
point of enjoying a detective film is that you don't know the result until the end.
But as an enlightened being, you have no time. Everything is known instantly, so
there's no enjoyment. There's no World Cup. This would be so sad! No football,
or if there were, you would instantly know the results from all the World Cups to
come! You would know who scores, everything, instantly with no slow-motion
replay!
[Q] Is there one mind or many minds? And is there one Buddha-nature or many
Buddha-natures?
[A] That's a difficult question! First, let me give you the standard answer.
Ultimately, there's no one, no two or any of that. Relatively, there are as many as
you project. But you see there's a problem here. It's quite good that there are all
these questions, and I think this is why Jigme Lingpa taught the Yeshe Lama.
Because if everything, including all sentient beings, is your projection, then you
could argue that it becomes quite difficult to practice bodhicitta as a path. But
the mind-only schools can easily answer that. They say that it's just because you
still have a residue of clinging to the idea of an externally existing sentient being
to which you must have compassion. During the path, meaning while you are in
the deluded state, there are bhumis, path, defilements, attainments and all of
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
337



that. Therefore there is bodhicitta. This is also a difficult question because when
you reach enlightenment - let's say you reach enlightenment this year, but it
takes me another hundred years - if there are two truly existing two Buddha-
natures, then there will be seniority and hierarchy problems! As in, "finally you
made it"!
[Q] So you're saying there's one mind?
[A] No. Do you mean ultimately?
[Q] Relatively.
(A) Relatively, there are as many as you project. That's why we have jinyeypa,
which actually means 'as many as you project'.
Study & Practice
[Q] I have a short practice question. If I'm on a motorcycle and I visualise
Vajrasattva above my head, is his hair blowing?
[A] Yes, very much! Because you are practicing, that's why it's blowing.
[Q] Could you say that from the equality point of view that Vajrasattva's hair isn't
blowing?
[A] We have to say that blowing and not blowing are inseparable. Or you can say
that there is no hair, and therefore there is no blowing. Tulku Jigme Rinpoche
just said that we don't know after all, as Vajrasattva is wearing a helmet!
[Q] You were saying that the intellectual approach tends to keep us stuck in
duality?
[A] Yes, but on the other hand there are some people, some practitioners or
teachers, who don't have the intellectual capacity, and therefore they tend to
discourage the intellectual approach. That's not so good. Otherwise why would
Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti write all that they did? It's very important. They're
all aimed at dismantling our clinging.
[Q] 1 can understand dismantling the clinging to the intellectual ideas, but isn't
devotion also dualistic, with a subject and object?
AJ Yes.
[Q] So how does that help us?
IA) For now, both are subject and object, but when Maitreya is talking about
devotion here, he's talking about some kind of confidence in the true nature of
the Buddha. He's saying that a mind that is caught in extremes, a mind that is
clinging to something has no confidence. Given a choice between a devotional
approach and a more non-devotional, sceptical approach, it's better to choose
the devotional approach. Even the word 'devotion' is somehow closer to non-
clinging. Of course, if the devotion is a clinging kind of devotion then it's not
devotion. But here we are talking about non-clinging, a devotion without any
reference. It's very interesting. When you have no reference, what happens?
Then you have no doubt! Doubt only comes when there is a reference or
example and you are trying to compare things against it. Then doubt comes.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
338



When there's no reference, there's no doubt - and that's devotion, and trust.
Why do we trust someone or something? We trust when we are not referring,
when we are not comparing. Comparing and referring are a cause of hope and
fear. So we prefer to use the word devotion (depa), like Buddha-nature itself. Of
course we can always use just one word, 'emptiness', instead of saying tham and
rig and all that. We can say emptiness is wrapped by the lotus, emptiness is
surrounded by the bees, and emptiness is covered by mud and so on. But since
we are talking about the quality aspect, it's better to choose words that relate to
that quality, like jñanas and kayas, instead of emptiness. If we say that by
practicing emptiness you will achieve emptiness, it doesn't sound very inspiring!
Q] Isn't analysis or reflection an essential first step to avoid precisely the blind
devotion that false gurus use as their best tool to attract followers?
[A] Of course, definitely. Otherwise, as I was saying, so-called gurus who are not
equipped with adequate understanding could discourage you from doing that,
and that's very dangerous. That's why the order is always hearing (töpa), then
contemplation (sampa), and then meditation (gompa), which is devotion. It's
never the other way round. If you don't have meditation and devotion, then you
cannot understand the Buddha-nature. That's the only way. But in order to have
that ability of meditation, you first need the contemplation and the hearing. Here
Maitreya is saying that meditation is the only way, and devotion is the last
stepping-stone. No matter where you come from, you will have to pass through
that.
IQ] The object of refuge that you describe seems quite contradictory. If it is an
object, it is no longer a refuge. And if it is not an object, what's there to take
refuge in?
[A] During the path, it is object of refuge.
[Q] But if it is an object, it is no longer the absolute Dharma or Sangha, as it is
duality.
(A) That's fine, accepted. The contradiction is not only made by you! Maitreya
also gave four contradictions or paradoxes, and I think your contradiction is
included within one of those.
[Q] I want to ask about the mahasandhi people, because they sound very
interesting! Where do they come from?
[A] I think they're in Brighton. On the grey muddy beach! It's a grey beach with a
lot of pebbles, not a sandy beach. They like eating fish and chips from the
newspaper. They have all the conditions they need to defeat their ego, but they
keep the last element of their identity because the people on the other side of
the English Channel, in Brittany, haven't given up their ego.
[Q] I don't understand a word you've just said!
[A] Because if you have no ego, then revenge won't be sweet, you see! Without
ego, revenge is useless. It's not sweet. It's just revenge.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
339



[Q] Several times, the questions brought up some other teachings such as
mahasandhi, but at the beginning you said that according to Longchenpa, there
is only one path. Isn't there a contradiction?
[A] The masters and the Bodhisattvas always say things like that. They are
advertising methods! And you know whose fault that is? It's the audience's
fault! First of all, we have to make sure the students concentrate and don't get
distracted. So we always say, "this is it", just like some people say "Coke is it".
But then you turn round and then "Fanta is it", or French wine is it! Everybody
talks about how great they are! Who knows? The greatness will have to be
decided by the students, the audience.
IQ] For me the only path is to admit the failures of one's own tradition, as it
doesn't include necessarily the whole path
(A) What do you mean?
[Q] For example if you are a Sakyapa, and you say that something belongs to the
mahasandhi path, then you are admitting that it is not in your path.
IA) Oh yes, but I'm like a nyento. These nyentő, they are Shravakas who also
teach Mahayana, but they're only doing it out of service to the Buddha. I'm a bit
like that. I'm kind of a Sakyapa, but it's good to do service, and because I've
heard about these things from great Buddha-like mahasandhi masters, as a
service to them I sometimes praise mahasandhi, But mahasandhi is simply
beyond me! I can't comprehend it!
[Q] You spoke of the two tendencies, Shentongpa and Rangtongpa. Did you say
that we should find our tendency, and follow it quite deeply before changing it?
A] The Shentongpa and Rangtongpa are two schools. Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo
said the Rangtongpa is very good for establishing the view, because it really
makes you view-less. It liberates you from all views, like Nagarjuna's homage to
the Buddha Gautama as the one who has renounced all views. But on the path,
when you are practicing, Shentongpa is good. Because when you talk about the
path, you have to talk about defilements and qualities and all that. Rangtongpa
emphasises emptiness, Shentongpa emphasises clarity. I guess you can't really
emphasise their unity, apart from practicing.
[Q] 1 had understood that Mipham Rinpoche's position was also that you need
both rangtong and shentong. So how is one to cope with the fact that in Tibetan
Buddhism there are traditions that say that only one is right?
[A] That's another advertising and marketing effort!
[Q] Do you mean that Sakyapas and Gelugpas who are exclusive Rangtongpas
actually have a hidden shentong side when they practice?
A] There are also many Shentongpas, like Shakya Chogden and Ngawang
Chödrak, who are Sakyapas.
[Q] But if you have Gelugpas who practice tantra, does that mean they must have
up their sleeves a shentong view that they're not coming clean about?
(A) They might not say it, but the Shentongpas will say that they must have such a
view otherwise they would not do those practices!
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
340



[Q] But then they could talk to the exclusive Shentongpas and say you must have
the view, therefore you must have rangtong?
[A] Yes, it's just like that. It's amazing to watch the Rangtongpa masters and the
Shentongpa masters. They're equally great. They're amazing. Sakya Pandita and
Künchen Tsong Khapa are great Rangtongpa masters. They are like the great
Manjushri. And then there's Longchenpa and Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen and
Milarepa. I think he is Shentongpa, but Gorampa says that Milarepa is a
Rangtongpa. They do that, you know, because Milarepa is famous. He's
necessary for window-dressing! We Tibetans will also talk about tendrel, because
if you're a Shentongpa you will live long. But countering that, if you're
Rangtongpa, you'll have fewer diseases!
[Q] If somebody gives you a gift or something, and you see it as a blessing of
your guru to help you on the path, is it still a karmic debt? Because it's all about
view isn't it?
(A) No, I don't think you'd get a karmic debt in that case. Not at all. And not
only will you accumulate merit, but you'll also create a very special link with this
person who is giving you the gift.
[Q] I have a lot of guilt accepting stuff, so it's nice to know that.
[A] Are you talking about things like the tantric practice of seeing everything as
the guru's expression and stuff like that?
[Q] i'm working on that, yes.
(A) You have to do it the other way around as well. You also have to offer to
others thinking that they are your guru.
[Q] Yes, I'm working on that!
[Q] During the Madhyamika, we talked about Bodhisattvas outshining Arhats. But
why are Arhats stuck in incomplete nirvana?
[A] They haven't accumulated enough merit. They don't have a greater view, and
they don't have a greater motivation. Remember the four defilements we talked
about? Their defilement is fear of samsara.
[Q] So is the kind of intellectual knowledge that we are going through now
indispensable for full enlightenment?
[A] Yes, for now. But remember, as we said during the section on Dharma, that
for Buddhism, the path is a deception. It's something you have to get rid of.
[Q] You said something wonderful, that meditation is devotion. Could you say
something more about that?
[A] The Kagyupas are quite good with this. They say something like "devotion is
the head of meditation". Because after all, why do we meditate? We meditate
because we want to be free from references. And devotion has this sense of not
adding references, but instead it's more like eliminating references, more like
trust.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
341



IQ] The text says that there are five obstacles that can arise for someone who has
only studied the second turning of the wheel, which the gyü lama can help to
overcome. But I feel that much as this Buddha-nature is very attractive, there is
also a big obstacle if we cling to this Buddha-nature as a view. And of course we
look around to check that there are no Prasangika police present, and we say it's
not truly existent. But these are only words, and instead we continue to cling
strongly. At least I feel this! So how can we avoid that? As a Prasangika would
say, because I have no view, I'm faultless. But if I have a view of this Buddha-
nature, probably I'm not.
[A] That's kind of their job! (Rinpoche smiles at Tulku Jigme Khyentse Rinpoche
and Tulku Pema Wangyal Rinpoche). That's a big question. You have to hire
someone, and the payment is big! You have to give your body, speech and mind!
And it's amazing, because despite this huge payment, we never know whether
they'll do anything, because at times not doing anything is considered helping!
That's it. Well, these people are available to be hired, and I think you have
already hired them! They are very soft-spoken but very efficient - like some kind
of silent killers!
[Q] We must practice the pure view, but I don't know how to practice the pure
view in everyday life. For example, seeing the guru as the Buddha, beings as
deities, the land as a pure land - but it's so hard to visualise! For example, if we
see a killer or liar, how can we see their Buddha-nature?
[A] This comes back to the five points that we talked about yesterday.
[Q] So if we see a pure land, how can we know if this is the real pure land, or just
our mind's projection?
[A] These questions are answered by the five points. First you have to hear that
everybody has the Buddha-nature. You have to hear this again and again, and
then contemplate it, and then meditate upon it. Then you will become
courageous, and you will obtain loving kindness. You will no longer have
inferiority or superiority, and all the other things that we discussed when we
talked about the five points. Now we need to address the last part of your
question. How would I know that it is not a projection, but that it is real? If you
know that it is your projection - that is real! That's about all we can say for now.
[Q] What's the relationship between Sangha and kham?
[A] Because the Sangha is a bit like a bridge. The Sangha are the practitioners,
and they have the kham. They are the ones who have noticed and heard, and
who are now cultivating and manipulating the kham, which is why they are the
Sangha. Everybody has Buddha-nature, even dogs, but most people don't notice
it. They haven't heard about it, so they cannot be Sangha. They are not
practicing or doing anything about it. Sakya Pandita said it's like two farmers
who both have plots of land, and one plants a rice field and the other doesn't do
anything with his land.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
342



IQ] Here, the reasons why the Buddha-nature is important are all path reasons.
There are no view reasons. Would it be correct then to say that the Uttaratantra
is a path teaching?
[A] Yes. Actually, all teachings are, even the Madhyamika. As soon as we begin
to talk or make a commentary, then it has to be a path. But this is a path that
attempts to describe the result and the ground. In the Madhyamika, the view is
explained more from the emptiness aspect, and here more from the clarity
aspect.
[Q] I have a question about devotion. When I think with dualism that there is a
Buddha outside me with a lot of qualities and compassion and so on, I can feel
and develop compassion, but when I think there's no Buddha, and there's
Buddha-nature which is in myself, my devotion completely falls down. What can I
do with that?
[A] Good question. You know, in many ways, what you are experiencing is good.
It's a struggle. Padampa Sangye said this. You pray to the Buddha thinking that
he's in front of you, like an object and subject, with tears in your eyes, whining,
complaining, and all that. And then suddenly you remember Buddha is
emptiness, Buddha is your mind, and there is no truly existing Buddha. All this
information comes to your mind. Then like you said, you don't know what to do,
as your devotion disappears, tears stop, yearning and longing stops. Padampa
Sangye said when that is happening it's like riding a horse. And then you think,
"Oh, I want to get back to my old mode of devotion". So Buddha is there again.
You are here. And then you cry and all that. And Padampa Sangye says that is
like dismounting the horse and riding the donkey. I think the conclusion is that
you should try to ride the horse as much as possible, and have the donkey
nearby. So when you fall, at least you have a donkey! It's better than nothing!
This is the Buddhist path. That question comes from quite a good
understanding. It's like that. You know, the Buddhist path is like this. Although
the path is so holy and precious, it needs to exhaust. If the path does not
exhaust then you are not really practicing. When you sharpen your knife, you
have a stone and a knife and you rub them together very quickly. And a so-
called sharp knife is actually nothing but the exhaustion of the stone and iron.
There is no new phenomenon called a sharp knife that comes from somewhere.
It's basically an exhaustion of the stone and iron. The path is like this. When
you practice devotion and compassion and all this, which is like the iron, and the
stone that is like your defilements, you rub them together and both have to
exhaust.
[Q] I have a practical question. We learned that all sentient beings have Buddha-
nature. I have hundreds of fleas in my house that attack me every morning and
every evening, and I have difficulties seeing Buddha-nature in these fleas that
attack me and suck my blood. So how should I behave with these fleas? At the
moment I put them in the bathtub and wash them away.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
343



[A] Nothing much. It depends on your determination. If you really want to
practice Mahayana Buddhism, then yes, you have to surrender to them.
[Q] On the path, the journey we take, you are emphasising that we have choices
to make and decisions to take, but at the same time it seems like there's a
destiny, a fate, a broader purpose. How does choice meet fate? It seems like
they are very far apart, and maybe we only have the illusion that we can influence
everything with our actions.
[A] I think we should do what the Buddha actually did. First we should try to
emphasise defeating anything that is non-virtuous. Start from very small things.
Be kind, gentle, non-violent, and generous. Then after a while, your spiritual
path must defeat clinging to the self. Virtuous actions alone might not do that,
as they might increase your clinging to the self instead. And then third you try to
defeat all kinds of view, even selflessness. That's a very general structure of the
path. If you want to be more particular, you have so much choice.
[Q] I'm very confused. When I am praying for someone who's dead and in the
bardo, should I pray to this person, or the Buddha, or myself? What should I
think at that time?
[A] All of them! Pray to Buddha, for the person, and for yourself.
[Q] But when we pray to the Buddha we are actually praying to our own potential,
so what am I doing if I'm praying to myself?
[A] Wait until tomorrow. There are nine examples coming to answer this
question!
[Q] I have a question about a real situation. I want to ask you something related
to my mother, who is, as I know it's a metaphor for hundreds of thousands of
situations. She's someone who has, because of all her compounded experiences,
concentration camps, and mental and physical illnesses, come to a point where
her floor is so dirty that she cannot see her own reflection or the larger reflection
of her Buddha-nature. She is attracted to the spiritual path, but she does not
appreciate what it suggests, and the gap is too big, the bridge is too long, the
path is too difficult. Like many people, she does not believe in other lives, and
it's very hard to see her not being able to take the next step to get to a situation
of greater contentment, happiness and bliss. What can we do in situations like
this to respectfully allow some space for these people get to a better place?
(A) Well, people like you and me who are aspiring to practice the Bodhisattva
path, we just have to be courageous and patient. So many of these situations
happened to Buddha himself when he was a Bodhisattva. There's a story about
when he was once a rishi, a truth teller.
[Tulku Jigme Rinpoche] This is a story about the Buddha in one of his previous
lives. He was a sage, one who proclaimed to be 'Patience'. That was his name.
There were two princes, and the elder one decided to lead a spiritual life and left
his kingdom to his younger brother. Then he retreated into the forest and was
meditating on patience, and one day the king came to the forest for a
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
344



promenade. While he was resting, his queens, courtesans and entourage walked
around and saw this rishi meditating, the sage, and they all felt very inspired.
And they requested instruction from him. While he was giving them teachings,
the king woke up and became very irritated that none of his entourage was there
to wait on him, and when he walked around and found that they were all listening
to this great sage, he felt very jealous and angry. So he barged in and asked, "So
tell me who are you"? And he responded, "I am the patient one", and the king
said "well, let's see if you're really the patient one. I'll cut off one of your limbs".
He cut off one of his arms, and then said "tell me who you really are, enough
joking", "I am the patient one", and so he cut off the other arm, and this
continued until he had cut off both his legs as well. And when he had finished
cutting his limbs, a strange phenomenon happened. Instead of blood oozing
out, there was a white substance. As the king began to calm down a little and
started to listen, he realised it was his brother. And then the sage made a
dedication of all his merit and said "Just as you have cut my limbs by asking me
questions, when I become a Buddha in the future, may I cut the limbs of your
obscuring emotions by asking you questions". And it is said that when the
Buddha attained enlightenment, some of his students were able to attain
liberation just because he asked them a few short questions.
(Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche) So, your mother already has the connection with
the reflection of the Buddha for having someone like you, for instance. That is
already a seed planted. In her next life, or maybe after 500 lifetimes, she can
wake up from that. Some of the sutras say that even when animals
unintentionally go around stupas, it can still plant some seeds. So in this kind of
situation, recite the names of the Buddha. Frame big paintings of the Buddha,
and place them in front of these people in all directions, so that wherever they go
they just have to see them. These are practices. We're not just making this up!
These Vajrayana people talk about liberation through hearing. We Mahayana
people talk about planting seeds.
[Q] What practice would be the best for us to help someone who's going through
a lot of pain and anxiety?
[A] Oh, all kinds of practices. Reminding them of the Triple Gem, that's good.
Reciting the names of the Three Jewels.
[Q] Could you clarify the attitude we should have when we're prostrating to you?
[A] I think my best advice is to remember the dog's tooth.
[Q] What is the path with no characteristics?
(A) Emptiness.
[Q] Isn't emptiness a view?
[A] It's also a path.
[Q] Then why do you distinguish ground from path?
(A) Because we have to talk to people.
[Q] But I don't understand how to use emptiness on the path.
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
345



IA] "Form is emptiness, emptiness is form". When you practice that, you cannot
dwell on “form is emptiness" and finish with that, and then go to emptiness is
form. If you do that, it becomes a mark, a characteristic, like "Oh, my cup is not
empty, let me throw the water away". Chandrakirti said this many times:
"Emptiness meditation should not be the destroyer of phenomena". It's not like a
bulldozer.
Q] I'm a little bit confused because we described the characteristics of Buddha-
nature, or maybe I am mixing up characteristics and qualities
(A) When we talk about the qualities of Buddha-nature, we're doing it all on the
level of the path. But when you practice, you have to go beyond characteristics.
The view and the path have to complement each other. The view is emptiness. If
you go against that during the path, and try to make lots of characteristics, then
you are contradicting the view. The ground, path and result have to complement
each other.
[Q] So if you do visualisation and it disappears because you know it is emptiness,
how can you use it?
(A) You have already used it.
[Q] It's already gone
[A] Yes, you already used it. It's already gone, you say. That's a characteristic.
You have to let that "already gone" go as well.
[Q] Is it true to say in Madhyamika we try to think about this logically, but this
text also points to experience?
[A] Madhyamika is more about the 'empty', and this text is about the 'ness'.
Generally, the Madhyamika is always taught first.
[Q] I have a question about motivation. I heard that I have to practice without
any hope or fear, and I understand that, because when I succeed a little bit in
practising in this way, I feel much less grasping. But I feel also that my
motivation is not so strong, and I think I'm making a mistake, because I think
that my motivation is founded on the hope to do something right or good for
other sentient beings, or to clean this lapis lazuli floor. So how can I keep a
strong motivation and practice without any hope?
[A] I've talked about sharpening the knife, and how the stone and the knife both
have to go. You can't have hope. But you can hope to have no hope.
[Q] What is the difference between wisdom and compassion?
[A] Not so much. The wisdom is what we are trying to achieve, and the
compassion can be the method to achieve that. You can also say wisdom is like
the sun, and compassion is like the rays of the sun.
[Q] What if someone compliments me because they are being professionally
correct, but they don't really mean it? Is there a karmic link? Do I have to return
something if I don't feel anything?
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
346



IA] It depends on the situation. All these kadampa masters are really good with
these very small things. One of them said that if somebody gives you a
compliment, whether they mean it or not doesn't really matter. It's not even your
business to find out. If they compliment you, you rejoice by thinking "may I also
have that kind of ability to see the goodness in others", things like that. The
kadampas are very good with this.
Buddha-nature & atman in Hinduism
[Q] On which bhumi does a Bodhisattva emanate more than one form?
[A] The first bhumi. Why do you want to know that?
[Q] Curiosity! I want to ask a question that had to come up sooner or later with
this text, I think. I don't have my texts of the Avadhuta Gita or the Dattatreya with
me, but I seem to remember one stanza that goes something like "How can I say
who I am? There was never a time when I was not. I have no name, no form. I
am all pervading like the sky. I am immutable. One without another"
Al Is this Krishna speaking?
[Q] No, this is Dattatreya.
JAI see. And then?
[Q] I'm wondering if enlightenment is only possible through Buddha-nature, and
if Dattatreya isn't enlightened, then what is he speaking about?
(A) What makes you think that Dattatreya isn't enlightened?
[Q] Because I think in what we've been learning, the Hindu view is not a complete
view, and therefore complete enlightenment is not possible.
[A] That's true.
[Q] Can you resolve this for me please?
[A] That's very difficult! in the 11th century in Tibet, Atisha Dipamkara cried upon
receiving the news that Maitripa had died in India. He said that "There are only
two people in the whole world that can differentiate between the Hindus and the
Buddhists, and one of them, Maitripa, has just died in India". And how many
years later is it now, and you are asking me this? It's very difficult. There's a big
difference between Buddhists and present-day Hindu fanatics in India, the
Hinduthva and Vajpayee Hindus. But the Hindus and Buddhists have debated a
lot, and for a very lowly and completely ignorant student like me, the fact that
there has been so much debate actually proves that they are very close.
[Q] They sometimes had to resort to magical powers to resolve the debates!
[A] Yes, and there are historical facts, like Nalanda was destroyed by the Hindus
two or three times. There is some dispute here, but it is true that there has been
a lot of destruction by the Hindus, at least twice. Now, there have been many
religions that have fought or destroyed each other without any philosophical
discussions, but Hindus and Buddhists have challenged each other in two ways.
One is physical destruction, like the Hindus destroying Nalanda University and
things like that, and of course there's nothing admirable about that. But I'm
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
347



always attracted to the fact that they debated, and that there was something to
debate. And the debates were even written down, and many of the texts that we
study nowadays, such as the Madhyamakavatara and Pramanavartikka, are by-
products of their debate. The Hindus are very worthy opponents in this second
sense. By contrast, show me one Buddhist text or Indian account where
Buddhists and Moslems actually had a philosophical discussion. In this case, the
opponent doesn't believe in that. I think there has been a lot of emotional
reaction. For instance, the second destruction of Nalanda was by a Hindu master
who worshipped the sun, and he burned Nalanda University by performing magic.
But he only did this because when he came to Nalanda University begging food, a
mindless young novice set the dogs on him and chased him away, and this really
made him angry. But Tulku Jigme Khyentse Rinpoche is saying that's a very small
reason, not the whole story! The Buddha himself studied Hinduism. He had two
gurus, and of course we say that he was not happy, but this is like a draldrey
again. He studied Hinduism, and found that it is not right, and then he found the
middle way, the path beyond extremes. And he found this, in a very strange way,
thanks to the extreme view that he had practiced previously.
Buddhists talk about "not truly existents, and I think that in this present day, this
is like the ace up our sleeves, our trump card. It is what distinguishes the
Buddhist view. However, only the Samkhyas, the high Samkhyas, have a view that
is so close to the Buddhist view as to be nearly indistinguishable. Not all Hindus
have this view. And we should also consider the Jain master Mahavira. Even in
the Buddhist sutras, we read that he only has two major differences with the
Buddha. He doesn't have the hair in between his two eyes or an ushnisha, and
that's saying a lot. Jainism is almost all gone now, and we see very little of it in
the West, much less than Buddhism. I think this is because in the past, many
kings were attracted to Buddhism, especially in far Eastern countries like Japan,
China, Korea and of course Tibet. That really helped to maintain Buddhism, and I
don't think that Jainism had that same level of support. It's such a shame that
Jainism isn't more prevalent, as it's one of the most wonderful paths. It's almost
fanatically non-violent! And instead we have violent religions growing
everywhere.
[Q] What do Hindus think about Buddhist enlightenment? Do they think that
Buddhists can reach enlightenment?
[A] I think they believe in the Buddha, because they believe in him as the ninth
avatar of Vishnu. So I think that maybe they believe in the second kind of
enlightenment that we talked about today. But I don't think they have the
concept of the fourth, the pre-dirty and pre-clean. It's very interesting. Even in
Hinduism, the Buddha is very much associated with compassion. The eighth
avatar, the one before the Buddha, was very vicious and killed many people. He
caused so much bloodshed, and when he saw the blood, he had so much
compassion. The Hindus say this compassion produced the Buddha, the ninth
avatar. I think Hindu scholars would say that Buddhism has the path, but
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
348



Buddhism is actually Hinduism. This puts us in a very awkward situation! But
you know, in his Treasury of the Sublime Vehicle (tekcho dző), Longchenpa said
that every path except lalo, which is a barbaric religion, is a stage on the way to
Buddhahood.
[Q] With all these debates between Hinduism or Buddhism or whatever, the
question may not be who is the happier, but who has the capacity to preserve
perfectly his enlightenment, his happiness. For example, Mozart and Beethoven
both wrote music, and we cannot really judge intellectually which music is better.
It's very beautiful music. But if Beethoven went to Mozart and destroyed his
piano, we might think perhaps Beethoven didn't ultimately understand what
music was about.
(A) It sounds to me as though you're talking like you are at an inter-faith
conference: "we are all different, but we are all the same". A hard-line Buddhist
would not say this. For example, His Holiness the Dalai Lama is very good. He
goes around saying that everybody has to be compassionate and kind, and that
all religions are the same. But right at the beginning he says, “I prostrate to
Gautama, who has renounced all views". In other words, I prostrate to Gautama,
who's not stuck or limited to any view. That is really saying a lot. Therefore you
cannot have Buddhism inside an inter-faith conference!
[Q] It just occurred to me that if Beethoven smashes Mozart's piano, and let's say
Mozart would never have thought of smashing the piano of Beethoven, that
would suggest that Beethoven's view is somehow lower. So if you have someone
who's prepared to destroy a religion, that suggests their view is less. The fact
that the Buddha says that he abandons all views is precisely the reason why
Buddhism does not physically seek to destroy other religions.
(A) I guess so.
[Q] Has it ever happened that Buddhists have destroyed other religions?
(A] Maybe among themselves, but not other religions. Almost none, except
maybe the Shangjung in Tibet, although even here I think it may have been their
own fault. Now, the siddha Virupa did some messy stuff! He invited ten or
twenty nihilist Charvaka masters (jangpenpa), to a party. He locked them in the
house, went outside and burned the house down. Avalokiteshvara really scolded
him, saying Virupa should never have done this and that because of that, he
wouldn't see Avalokiteshvara in this life. I think Chögyam Trungpa talks about
Buddhism as "the philosophy of non-philosophy". I think that clearly
differentiates Buddhism from other philosophies!
[Q] What makes us different from Hindus, given that Hindus say everything is
from Shiva?
[A] This is their job! (Rinpoche turns to Tulku Jigme Khyentse Rinpoche and
Tulku Pema Wangyal Rinpoche). I'm kind of a Hindu myself! What do you want
to know? The difference between Buddha-nature and atman or Ishvara?
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
349



[A] (Tulku Jigme Khyentse Rinpoche) I don't have an answer to that, but I was just
wondering if Rinpoche already answered this when he was explaining the slight
difference in the way we are using the vocabulary of permanence, clean, self and
bliss.
[A] (Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche) I didn't even realise that!
Practice and the Four Seals
IQ] Rinpoche, in translating the four seals and the eighteen uncommon qualities
into today's life and world, could you give some suggestions about concrete
actions and the path to take?
[A] I don't know about the 18 uncommon qualities. But the four seals can be
practiced very concretely. For instance, if you know that all compounded things
are impermanent, if you really know it and not just intellectually, you will really
change your life. For example, if you're arranging to meet someone for dinner
tomorrow, as you are writing the time in your calendar you'll know that maybe
the dinner will never happen. Anything could happen in between. So what does
that get you? It means you won't get attached and fixated on tomorrow's dinner.
So if that dinner gets cancelled, you won't freak out. There are endless blessings
in just this first seal. So what about the second one, that all emotions coming
from clinging to the self are suffering? Basically, the fundamental problem of
human beings, the root and the mother of all our problems, is that we look at a
few transitory things collected together and then think they are one, permanent,
clean, valuable, and so on. That is the fundamental problem. In reality,
everything is like a bubble or slowly sinking sandcastle. But we have the habit of
thinking that they are one, permanent and all that, so any emotion coming from
this habit is going to lead us to pain. When you know that, there's so much
blessing, because everything is like that. 'Relationships' are just labels affixed
on a few transitory things put together. Government, parliament, the economy,
everything is the same. If you know that, you will never be disappointed when
people like George Bush are elected. Because they are all transitory collections
jigpey tsok). We are always clinging to something, we give it a name, and that
name is usually given to collection of perishable or already perishing group of
things. Our so-called life is just a gathering of perishing or perishable stuff that
we label as something, such as "me" or "I". That's all we have. Other than that
we have nothing, no life!
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Questions and Answers
350



Glossary: Tibetan and Sanskrit Words & Phrases
Abhisamaya-alamkara (Skt. Abhisamaya-alamkāra, Tib. ngontok gyen, was
(mngon rtogs rgyan]): "Ornament of Realisation" by Maitreya
abhisheka (Skt.): see wang
amra (Tib. WT a mra]): mango
Aryadeva (Skt. Aryadeva): Indian master of Madhyamika
Asanga (Skt. Asanga): Indian master of Chittamatra; brother of Vasubandhu
atman (Skt. ätman): self
ayatana (Skt.); see kyechey
bakchak (Tib. 4. [bag chags]): habit; propensity; habitual tendency or pattern
bhumi (Skt. bhūmi): ground; level (on the Bodhisattva path)
bimpa (Tib. Ava [bim pa]): a type of exotic fruit (from the plant Momordica
monadelpha)
Bodhicharyavatara (Skt. Bodhicharyavatāra, Tib. changchub sempa chöpa la jugpa,
Ke Tangkata5(byang chub sems dpa' spyod pa la "jug pa) or chöjug,
392517 [spyod 'jug]): “The Way of the Bodhisattva" by Shantideva (8th
Century)
chak (Tib. 2547 ('chag]): to move about
chakpa (Tib. ANT (chags pa]): to be attached; attachment; desire; craving for
chakpa mepa (Tib. Aga [chags pa med pa]): not being fixated on one object
chaktok dralwa (Tib. an (chags thogs bral ba]): free from attachment and
obstruction
changchub (Tib. 554 [byang chub]): enlightenment
chencha gakpa mepa (Tib. wys as a * {mkhyen cha 'gags pa med pa]):
unobstructed omniscience
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
351



chi chabdro (Tib. Yada (phyi’i skyabs 'gro]): outer taking refuge
Chimey Pema Tötreng (Tib. Raška ['chi med pad+ma thod phreng]): The skull
garland lotus-born deathless, a name of Guru Rinpoche
chin (Tib. Sa [byin!): see jin
chinlab (Tib. 525 [byin tlabs]): see jinlab
Chittamatrin (Skt. Cittamātrin): follower of the Chittamatra ("Mind only") school
chö (Tib. 255 [mchod), Skt. puja): ceremony; ritual
chökyi ku (Tib. Ikvêt# [chos kyi sku], Skt. dharmakāya):
chöku (Tib. ša* (chos sku]): see chökyi ku
chökyi ying (Tib. 5 (chos kyi dbyings], Skt. dharmadhatu): basic space of all
phenomena; expanse of reality
chölam (Tib. THW [spyod lam]): specific actions
chomtrul sum (Tib. šauna" (cho 'phrul gsum)); the three miracle powers of the
Buddha
chönyi (Tib. šarga (chos nyid), Skt. dharmata): the innate or true nature of
phenomena
dag dampey paroltu chinpa (Tib. 459724125347 [bdag dam pa'i pha rol tu phyin
pa]): transcendent sublime identity
daknang (Tib. 17** [dag snang]): pure perception
dakpa (Tib. 5* [dag pa]): true; primordially pure; genuine; authentic
denpa (Tib. 757 [bden pa]): true; truth
denpa (Tib. 994 [Idan pa]): container; possessor (the fifth of the 10 aspects of
Buddha-nature)
depa (Tib. 554 (dad pa}): devotion, faith, confidence
deshek nyingpo: see dewar shekpey nyingpo
deshin shekpa (Tib. 17195 ayat (de bzhin gshogs pa], Skt. tathāgata): literally 'gone
to suchness', Buddha
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
352



deshin shekpey nyingpo (Tib. 5a@yahang (de bzhin gslegs pa’i snying po], Skt.
tathāgatagarbha): Buddha-nature
deshin kuntu drowey dön (Tib. 5a&a ya grama(de bzhin kun tu 'gro ba'i don): all-
pervasive (the eighth of the 10 aspects of Buddha-nature)
dewar shekpa (Tib. a anar (bde bar gshegs pa], Skt. sugata): literally gone to
bliss'; Buddha
dewar shekpey nyingpo (Tib. 252 tawaran [bde bar gshegs pa'i snying po), Skt.
sugatagarbha):
dewey paroltu chinpa (Tib.aaaringą (bde ba'i pha rol tu phtin pa]):
transcendent bliss
Dharanishvararaja-sutra: see zungkyi gyelpo
dharmadhatu (Skt.): see chokyi ying
dharmakāya (Skt.): see chokyi ku
dhatu (Skt.): see kham
di la (Tib.&# ['di la]): this (indicating some thing)
do (Tib. 55 [mdo), Skt. sutra): sutra; teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha in his human
form
dodey (Tib. wa[mdo sde]): sutra; the sutra section of the Tripitaka
Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen (Tib. 5THÀNIA FUL [dol po pa shes rab rgyal mtshan]): a
Shentongpa master (1292-1361)
dorjey chöpa (Tib. 221354 [rdo rje gcod pa], Skt. Vajracchedika): the Diamond Sutra
dorjey nedün (Tib. Bag7 (rdo rje gnas bdun]): the seven vajra points; the seven
indestructible points
döndam yingkyi kong (Tib. 591 avrigatan (don dan dbyings kyi klong]): real
meaning of emptiness
dral (Tib. 94 [bral]): see dralwa
draldrey (Tib. page [bral 'bras]): result of absence; result of elimination
dralwa (Tib. Jan (bral ba]): to be rid of; free from; liberated; elimination
dralwey dreybu (Tib. muregat (bral ba'i 'bras bu]): see draldrey
drangdön (Tib.555 (drang don), Skt. neyartha): (teachings of) provisional or
expedient meaning. See also: nyeydön
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
353



drang song (Tib. 55. [drang srong), Skt. rishi): sage; holy hermit
drey (Tib. 94 ['bras]): see dreybu
dreybu (Tib. 29 ['bras bu}): result; effect; fruition (the third of the 10 aspects of
Buddha-nature)
drima (Tib. @w (dri ma)): stain; defilement
drima dralwey yönten (Tib. ŜNAURU 58 [dri ma bral ba'i yon tan]): the quality of
being free from defiled obscuration
drima dralrung (Tib. Gayug5 (dri ma bral rung]): the stains are removable
dripa (Tib. gak [bag chags]): obscuration; defilement
dro tagpa (Tib. 50+ {sgro btags pa]): fabrication assertions, exaggerations or
imputations (also spelled (sgro 'dogs])
drowa (Tib. 20** ['gro ba}); to walk
drumta (Tib. (grub mtha*]): tenets; tenet systems; philosophical schools
dujey (Tib. 29V5N ('dus byas)): compounded
duk (Tib. 257 [idug): to sit
dülja (Tib. 25US 'dul bya}); beings to be tamed
dulma (Tib. Ewa (rdul ma}); parts
dumajey (Tib. Gnaga (dus ma byas}); uncompounded
dzinpa (Tib. IT ('dzin pa]): grasping; perception of subject
dzogchen (Tib. Enaba (rdzogs chen], Skt. mahāsandhi, mahā ati). Great Perfection
dzöpu (Tib. Sy [mdzod spu], Skt. urna): circle of hair between a Buddha's
eyebrows; one of the thirty-two major marks of a great being, kyebu
chenpö tsensum chutsa nyi [skyes bu chen po'i intshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis)
dzünpa (Tib. 69 [rdzun pa}): falsehood; lie
ganachakra (Skt.): see tsok khor
Garab Dorje (Skt. Prahevajra): first Nirmanakaya dzogchen master
gewa (Tib. ** [dge ba]): virtue; virtuous deeds; good; happy
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
354



gokpey denpa (Tib saamataas na f’gog pa'i bden pa}): the truth of cessation of
suffering, the third of the Four Noble Truths; long form of gokpa l'gog pa]
gompa (Tib. * [sgom pa]); meditation; practice; training; cultivation
gowa (Tib. 5T [go bal): intellectual understanding
gyachey (Tib. 5. [rgya che]): immense; immensity
Gyachin (Tib. 535 [brgya byin]): a name of Indra, so called because he achieved
that form by making hundreds of offerings
gyü (Tib. [rgyul): cause (the second of the 10 aspects of Buddha-nature)
gyü (Tib. 15 [rgyud], Skt. tantra): continuum
gyünta (Tib. Fakat (rgyun mitha’]): the last moment of the tenth bhumi before
enlightenment
gyütün (Tib. Fagh (rgyu mthun]): similar cause
gyurwa mepa (Tib. az iga" ['gyur ba med pa]): unchanging; immutable;
changeless
Jambudvipa (Skt. Jambudvīpa, Tib. zambuling ('dzam bu gling!): rose apple continent
jangpenpa (Tib. IT [rgyang 'phen pa]): Charvaka; nihilist
jug (Tib. fêa('jug]): entrance; approach (the sixth of the 10 aspects of Buddha-
nature)
jikpey tsok (Tib. Qemaa ('jig pa'i fshogs]): the transitory collections, which are
imputed as truly existing. See jiktsok kyi tawa
jikten khyenpa (Tib. TAMB [’jig rten mkhyen pa): "One who knows the world";
syn. The Buddha
jiktsok kyi tawa (Tib. @ayari ya ['jig tshøgs kyi Ita ba]): the view of (or belief in)
transitory collections. See jikpey tsok
jin (Tib. [byin]): splendour; magnificence; quality
jinlab (Tib.gq (byin rlabs]): blessings
jinyeypa (Tib. 289a (ji myed pa]): things (as many) as they appear in their diversity
jitawa (Tibera (ji Ita ba}); things as they are
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
355



jñana (Skt.): see yeshe
jungney (Tib.
འབྱུང་གནས་
40 [byung gnas}): origin; source
kadag (Tib. TST (ka dag]): primordially pure
kangla kangdül (Tib. apa aku (gang la gang dul]): training sentient beings in
whichever way is required
kangnyi namkyi chok (Tib, YETIỀN3848 rkang gnyis Inains kyi mchog): literally
'supreme among bipeds'; Buddha Shakyamuni
karma (Skt., Tib. lay [las]): action
kaya (Skt. kāya, Tib. ku, # [sku]): literally 'body'; a dimension of enlightened
being, functioning as a basis for the enlightened qualities and aspects of
timeless awareness
kham (Tib. a [khams), Skt. dhatu): element; realm; component; nature;
disposition
khenpo (Tib. a [mkhan po]): scholar-abbot
khyenpa (Tib. aga(mkhyen pa}): knowledge; knowing; wisdom
klesha (Skt.): see nyönmongpa
kön (Tib. [dkon}): rare
könchok (Tib. 317735T [dkon mchog)); rare and precious gem; see ratna
kor (Tib. (dkør]): offerings of the devoted to sublime beings worthy of such
ku (Tib. [sku], Skt. kāya): dimension; body
kudang yeshe (Tib. 855wxar [sku dang ye shes]): kayas and wisdoms
kundzop (Tib. naža (kun rdzob]): relative; conventional
kundzop chi chabdro (Tib. 1972" Panait kun rdzob phyi’i skyabs ºgro]): relative
taking refuge
kurdep (Tib.
*72956" [skur bdebs], Skt. apavada): depreciation
kyebu chenpö tsensum chutsa nyi (Tib. Anadaiwa Namku (skyes chen poʻi
mtshan sum bcu rtsa gnyis]): the thirty-two major marks of a great being (see
also: urna, ushnisha)
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
356



kyechey (Tib. al bl.5" [skye mched), Skt. ayatana): the sense fields; the twelve sources
of perception
kyewa (Tib. = [skye ba]): birth
kyoshey (Tib. šiqa(skyo shas]): regret; remorse; “genuine heart of sadness"
Kyüchok (Tib. gray (khyu mchog): literally leader of a herd'; supreme animal;
syn. The Buddha
lalo (Tib. a [kla klo]): barbarian; primitive; uncivilised; savage
lam (Tib. 2a (lam]): path
lama (Tib. F# (bla ma), Skt. uttara): unsurpassed; none higher
lamgyi denpa (Tib. wahana (lam gyi bden pa]): the truth of the path (to the
cessation of suffering)
ley (Tib. w [las), Skt. karma): action (the fourth of the 10 aspects of Buddha-
nature)
Thakpey sampa tenpey do (Tib. HATT TALWAYT (thag pa'i bsan pa bstan pa'i
mdo]): the Sutra Exposing the Superior Mind
Thenkyey (Tib. 97 94V (ihan skyes], Skt. sahaja): co-emergent; innate; spontaneous
(aspect of conventional reality)
Thündrup (Tib. 995 (thun grub]): spontaneous presence
lobur gyi drima (Tib. TOÀN [glo bur gyi dri ma]): adventitious stains that obstruct
or obscure omniscience
loburwa (Tib. 3 (glo bur bal, Skt. agantuka): adventitious; temporary;
superficial; non-inherent
löden (Tib. 5 [bio ldan]): literally “with a mind'; intelligent
longku (Tib. ENS (longs sku), Skt. sambhogakāya): the enjoyment body of
wisdom's compassionate clarity; one of the three kayas or bodies of
enlightenment
lu (Tib. Pa [lus]): ordinary body; physical body
lung (Tib. F. [rlung!, Skt. prana): the 'winds' or energy currents of the body
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
357



ma (Tib. V [ma]): not
madag (Tib. 15 (ma dag]): impure
madag dagpa (Tib. 5750" [ma dag dag pa]): both pure and impure
Madhyamaka (Skt. Madhyamāka, Tib. uma, au [dbu ina]): the view of the middle
way' [the middle way means not holding any conceptual or extreme views]
Madhyamakavatara (Skt. Mädhyamakāvatāra, Tib. uma la jugpа, ARREST [dbu ma
la 'jug pa]): "Introduction to the Middle Way" by Chandrakirti
Madhyamika (Skt. Madhyamika, Tib. umapa, sav (dbu ma pa]): a holder of the view
of the Madhyamaka
maha ati (Skt. mahā ati): see dzogchen
mahasandhi (Skt. mahāsandhi): see dzogchen
Mahayana (Skt. mahāyāna, Tib. tekpa chenpo (theg pa chen po]): greater vehicle
mayöpa (Tib.
a4 {ma g.yos pa]): has not moved/deviated
mi jigpa zhi (Tib. zemana (mi jigs pa bzhi]): the Four Fearlessnesses of the
Buddha)
möpa (Tib. ÍNT [mos pa}); aspiration; prayer; devotion; enthusiasm
mudra (Skt. mudrā, Tib. f (phyag rgya]): seal; mark
Mulamadhyamakakarika (Skt. Mūlamadhyamākākārikä, Tib. FAIT [rtsa ba shes
rab]): "Root verses on the middle way" by Nagarjuna
muthekpa (Tib. W [mu stegs pa], Skt. tīrthika): extremist; one who holds an
extreme view
nadi (Skt.); see tsa
Nagarjuna (Skt. Nāgärjuna, Tib. [klu sgrub]): Indian scholar of Madhyamika
naljor ngönsum (Tib. Furaha ya (mal byor mngon sum}); a yogi's direct
cognition; in pramana, the fourth mode of direct cognition, which is only
within the scope of the spiritually developed
nampar nangdze (Tib. Fau* 15 (mam par snang mdzad]): literally 'fully
manifested'; Vairocana Buddha
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
358



namdrol (Tib. paštar (mam grol), Skt. vimokşa): liberation; complete/total liberation
nampar tarpa (Tib. uz" [ram par thar pa]): an account of the origins
namshey (Tib. Farha [mam shes), Skt. vijnana): consciousness; continuity of the
mind (the fifth skandha, the skandha of consciousness)
nekab (Tib. ayawwa [gnas skabs]): occasion; situation (the seventh of the 10
aspects of Buddha-nature)
nga (Tib. * (nga]): 1; me
ngöpo (Tib. drží (dngos po]): thing; entity
ngowo (Tib. [ngo bo]): essence (the first of the 10 aspects of Buddha-nature)
ngowo nyiku (Tib. 35 Ingo bo nyid sku], Skt. svabhavikakāya): essence kaya
nirmanakaya (Skt. nirmanakāya, Fib. tulpeyku, Yuna (sprui pa’i sku}); emanation
body
nirvana (Skt. nirvana, Tib. 5079981 (inya ngan las ’das pa]): beyond suffering
nyal (Tib. 4 [nyal]): to sleep
nyampar chenpo (Tib. NHAT B5+ [mnyam par chen po]): great equanimity
nya ngendey (Tib. 5429 [mya ngan 'das), Skt. nirvāna): see nirvana
nyejin (Tib.garaga (nyes ’byin]): extracting defects
nyejin gyi lam (Tib. Saage tua (nyes 'byin gyi lam]): the path that extracts defects,
a name for the Mahayana path
nyento (Tib. 338 [nyan thos), Skt. śrävaka): hearer; listener
nyeydön (Tib. Er Inges don), Skt. nitartha): (teachings of) ultimate or certain
meaning. See also: drangdon
nyingpo (Tib. gif [snying po]): essence; heart; pith
nyomjuki dripa (Tib. ŞWAVESTIS [snyoms 'jug gi sgrib pa]): obscuration for
serenity; that which prevents entering serenely the states of samadhi
nyongwa (Tib. " {myong ba]): experience
nyönmongpa (Tib. Ba'a (nyon mongs pal, Skt. klesha): emotions; afflictions
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
359



ösel (Tib. 25*11W ['od gsal), Skt. prabhasvara): luminosity
padma (Skt., Tib. (pad+ma]): lotus
pakpa (Tib. 2012 l'phags pa), Skt. arya): sublime being
paltreng gi do (Tib. pāGURUK SAK PRS (Iha mo dpal ”păreng gi seng ge’i sgra'i
mdo]): The Shrimaladevisimhanada Sutra
paramita (Skt. päramitā): see paroltu chinpa
paroltu chinpa (Tib. 153 (pha rol tu phyin pa], Skt. pāramita): transcendent;
going beyond
Pema Katang (Tib.Ky*TI** (pad ma bka thang]): Life-story of Guru
Padmasambhava, revealed by Orgyen Lingpa (1329-1360?)
prajña (Skt. prajñā): see sherab
Prajñaparamita (Skt. Prajñāpāramitā, Tib. ANATOVŽA 5845): literally "wisdom
gone beyond"; the final of the six paramitas; genre of sutras that teach
emptiness
prana (Skt.): see lung
Prasangika (Skt. Prāsangika, Tib. AURIU (thal'gyur pa!): follower of
"consequentialist" school of Madhyamika
puja (Skt.): see cho
pungpo (Tib. [phung po], Skt. skandha): aggregate
rang (Tib. 45 (rang]): self; oneself; intrinsic; inherent
rangsem sangvey (Tib. 45 NAKHV (rang sems sangs rgyas}): Your own mind that
is the buddha
rangshin (Tib. 15a [rang bzhin]): nature
rangshin nepey rig (Tib. In a LAN [rang bzhin gnas pa'i rigs]): naturally
present affinity
ratna (Skt., Tib. könchok, 5T [dkon mchog]): literally "rare" and "precious"
when referring to the Three Jewels; jewel as in tri ratna or “Triple Gem"
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
360



rig (Tib. Away (rigs), Skt. gotra): race; family; class; kind; lineage
rigpa (Tib. 24(rig pa]): awareness
rishi (Skt.): see drangsong
rochik (Tib. II.AT [ro gcig), Skt. ekarasa): one taste; the absence of ego's
judgement and confused conceptual labelling
sakchey (Tib. 245V (zag bcas]): emotions
sambhogakaya (Skt. sambhogakäya): see longku
samgyi mi khyapa (Tib. JuaIÊNENGAH {tssam gyis my khyah pa], Skt. acintya):
inconceivable
sampa (Tib. KIT (bsain pa]): contemplation; reflection; consideration
samsara (Skt. samsāra, Tib. korwa [’khor ba!): cyclic existence; realm of suffering
samten shi (Tib. 2445972 [bsam gtan bzhi]): the four dhyanas, four absorptions:
1) joy and reflection. 2) joy and absence of reflection. 3) being free of joy,
and equable concentration states. 4) supreme equanimity
sang (Tib. " (sangs]): enlightened; purified; awakened
sang jarung (Tib. angga (sangs bya rung]): enlightenment is possible
sangyey gyi yönten (Tib. way14755 (sangs rgyas kyi yon tan), Skt. buddhaguna):
enlightened qualities
sangyey kyi ku (Tib. XION (sangs rgyas kyi sku]): the body of the buddha
selcha (Tib. 4. (gsal cha]): cognisant quality, the aspect of its luminosity or
clarity (gsal ba'i cha]
selwa (Tib. f (gsal ba]): luminosity; clarity
sem (Tib. ad [sems), Skt citta): mind
semche (Tib.5 (sems bskyed]): generating enlightened mind; bodhicitta
semchi nangwa (Tib. hangga (sems phyi snang ba]): mental projection
sem dang yeshe (Tib. Qwagawha (sems dang ye shes]): mind and wisdom are
separate
semkyi rangshin (Tib. Hain 250 (sems kyi rang bzhin): nature of (the) mind
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
361



sengey naro (Tib. 2 seng ge'i ngo ro]): “The Lion's Roar”, Mipham Rinpoche's
treatise on Buddha--nature
Shakyamuni (Skt. Shakyamuni)
Shantideva (Skt. Šāntideva)
shastra (Skt. śāstra, Tib, tencho, wata' (bstan bcos]): commentary
sheja dző (Tib. darga5 (shes bya mdzod]): see sheja kunchab dző
sheja kunchab dző (Tib. ANSTAS 5 (shes bya kun khyab mdzod]): Jamgön
Kongtrül's encyclopaedia, the “Treasury of Knowledge"
shelwa (Tib. quia [bshal ba]): to clean
shentong uma chenpo (Tib. pag nag [gzhan stong dbu ma chen po]): great
shentong Madhyamika
Shentongpa (Tib. apaga, [gzhan stong pa]): follower of "emptiness of other"
interpretation of emptiness (shunyata), associated with Jonangpa School in
Tibet and teachers such as Dol po pa
sherab (Tib. [shes rab), Skt. prajña): wisdom; knowledge; see also: yeshey
shinjang (Tib. (shin səyang]): workability; pliancy, particularly with regard to
the mind
shintu namdag (Tib. 389T {shin tu mam dag]): utterly pure
shiwa (Tib. Qa (zhi ba], Skt. santi): peace; liberation
shravaka (Skt. srāvaka, Tib. nyentő, szik (nyan thos]): hearer; (pious) listener;
follower of the Hinayana path
Shravakayana (Skt. Śrāvakayāna, Tib. Hazard2475 [nyan thos kyi theg pa]): shravaka
path
shunyata (Skt.): see tongpanyi
Siddhartha (Skt. Siddhārtha, Tib.5797 (don grub]): literally "manifests what is
meaningful"; the Buddha
skandha (Skt.): see pungpo
so so rang rigpey yeshey (Tib. rázkuwa [so so rang rig pa'i ye shes]): self-
awareness wisdom
sugata (Skt.): see dewa shekpa; tathagata
sugatagarbha (Skt.): see dewa shekpey nyingpo, tathagatagarbha
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
362



sutra (Skt. sutra, Tib. v5 [mdo]): teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha in his human
form
Svatantrika (Skt., Tib. 1979 (rang ryyup pa]): “autonomous" school of Madhyamika
svabhavikakaya (Skt. svabhavikakāya): see ngowo nyiku
tagpa (Tib. 575 (rtag pa]): permanent, eternal, lasting forever
tagpey paroltu chinpa (Tib. Katalu 25354 (rtag pa'i pha rol tu phyin pa]):
transcendent permanence
takpa nyipa (Tib. waaaa [brtags pa gnyis pa]): literally 'two sections'; the
Hevajra tantra
taktu mingyur (Tib. HTF ax (rtag tu mi 'gyur]): unchanging (the ninth of the 10
aspects of Buddha-nature)
Taktungu (Tib. 54755 [rtag tu ngu), Skt. Sadaprarudita): the Bodhisattva “Always
Weeping" (name)
tathagata (Skt. tathāgata): see deshin shekpa; sugata
tathagatagarbha (Skt. tathāgatagarbha): see deshin shekpey nyingpo, sugatagarbha
tawey mi-ngönpa (Tib. aut [lta bas mi ngom pa]): insatiable beauty;
something you don't get tired gazing at
tawey nyingmong (Tib. Panga kikay {lta bas snying emongs]): something that ravishes
your heart
teldrip mepa (Tib. FRUTTI Raazaa l’phel ba dang 'grib pa med pa'i mdo]): the
"Sutra of No Increasing and No Decreasing"
tenching drelwa jungwa (Tib. q=h247255* (rten cing brel bar byung ba], Skt.
pratiyasamutpada): interdependent arising
tendrel (Tib. grana (rten ’brel], Skt. pratityasamutpada): connection; abbreviation of
(rten cing 'brel bar byung bal: dependent arising; interdependent origination
Thujey Chenpo (Tib. Ha By [thugs rje chen po], Skt. mahakarunika]): “Great
compassion", a name of Avalokiteshvara
tiglé (Tib. ESTÀ (thig le), Skt. tilaka, bindu): essence; sphere
tobchu (Tib. A (stobs bcu], Skt. daśabala): the Ten Powers (of the Buddha)
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
363



tobpa (Tib. + (thob pal, Skt. prapti): to acquire; obtain; get
togma (Tib. a [thog ma]): beginning
togma tama umeypa (Tib. šakagaa walaw (thog ma tha ma dbu ma’i pa]): no end,
no beginning, and no middle
togpa (Tib. " (rtogs pa], Skt. adhigama): realisation
togpa (Tib. [thogs pa]): obstruction; blockage; impediment; to impede
tokpa (Tib. (thogs pa]): see togpa
tön (Tib. (ston]): see tönpa
tongpang (Tib. X [mthong spang]): the defilements/obscurations that are
abandoned/purified on the path of seeing
tongpanyi (Tib. 35 (stong pa nyid), Skt. shunyata): emptiness (the absence of
true existence in all phenomena, as distinct from nothingness)
tönpa (Tib. & [ston pal): teacher
tönting (Tib. KÕIKËS [mthon mthing]): shiny blue-black, the colour of the Buddha's
hair
töpa (Tib. ENT (thos pa], Skt. śruta): hearing; to hear; learn; study
trinley (Tib. ): activity
trö (Tib. ška (spros], Skt. prapanca): to elaborate; fabricate
trödral (Tib. Ngư (spros brai], Skt. nisprapanca): beyond extremes; freedom from
(mental) constructs or conceptual elaborations; simplicity
tsa (Tib. (rtsa), Skt. nadi): the channels in the subtle body through which energy
currents flow
tsangwey paroltu chinpa (Tib. TH53F[gtsang ba'i pha rol tu phyin pa]):
transcendent purity
tsenma mepa (Tib. 25W (intshan ma med pa]): absence of characteristics
tsenzang sonyi (Tib. wha25 aan [mtshan bzang so gnyis]): the Thirty Two Major
Marks
Tsepamey (Tib. 94625 [tshe dpag med), Skt. Amitayus): The buddha of boundless
life; also a name for Guru Rinpoche
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
364



Esok (Tib. (tshogs]): feast; gathering; literally to bring many things together',
Tib. arazie a [mang po 'dzom bde ba]
Esok khor (Tib. TA ZAZ (tshogs 'khor), Skt. ganachakra): feast gathering
tubpa (Tib. 394 (thub pa], Skt. muni): literally able', 'one who can accomplish'; syn.
The Buddha; one of the family names of the Shakya clan
tulku (Tib. YN (sprul sku], Skt. nirmanakāya): emanation body
tulpeyku (Tib. Fakat (sprul pa’i skul): see tulku
uma gyen (Tib. Ta [dbu ma rgyan], Skt. Madhyamakalamkāra): "Ornament of the
Middle Way", by Shantaraksita (8th century)
urna (Skt.): see dzőpu
ushnisha (Skt.): see u tsug tor
u tsug tor (Tib. 547575X (dbu gtsug tor), Skt. ushnisha): a protuberance on the
crown of the head; one of the thirty-two major marks, see kyebu chenpö
tsensum chutsa nyi
uttara (Skt.): see lama
Uttaratantra (Skt., Tib. gyü lama, Tib. Far [rgyud bla ma}):
vajra (Skt., Tib. dorjey, 7 [rdo rje]): indestructible
vijñana (Skt.): see namshey
wang (Tib. 54 dbang], Skt. abhisheka): initiation; empowerment (abbreviation for
(dbang bsku))
wangpo khyenpa (Tib. Fakimaat (dbang po mkhyen pa}}: One of the qualities of the
buddha, which allows him to see every single sentient being's sense
elements, constituents, etc
yana (Skt. yāna, Tib. m! [theg pa]): "vehicle"; way of proceeding (on the path)
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
365



yangdak pe dak (Tib. 52T (yang dag pa'i dag]): absolute purity
yermey (Tib. 9725 [dbyer med]): non-dual; inseparable (the tenth of the 10
aspects of Buddha-nature)
yeshey (Tib.wix [ye shes], Skt. jñana): primordial wisdom; see also: sherab
yigyi yul (Tib. aziwy ſyid kyi yul], Skt. manovişaya): mental object; mental field;
objects of mind
ying (Tib. 5541 (dbyings]): space
yö (Tib.ar (g.yos}): moved, deviated
yönten (Tib. 5 [yon tan], Skt. guna): quality, in the sense of an enlightened
quality
Yönten Dzó (Tib. čí5535 [yon tan mdzod]): “Treasury of Precious Qualities” by
Jigme Lingpa (1730-1798)
yuldang yulchen rochik (Tib. Wu Wu saboy (yul dang yul can ro gcig]):
inseparability of subject and object, one taste
yulmey (Tib. uri (yul med]): placeless; nonexistent
yungdrung (Tib. Tanaga [g.yung drung]): changeless; unchanging
zabmo nangdön (Tib. Sri [zab mo nang don]): The “Profound Inner Sense", one
of the three most important texts of the Kagyu tradition, written by the 3rd
Karmapa (rang byung rdorjel
zangpo (Tib. 43571 (bzang po!): good; kind; excellent; noble
zapa (Tib. A (zab pa), Skt. gambira): deep; profound
zhen (Tib. 764 [gzhan]): different; other
zhiwa (Tib. Qa (zhi ba]): see shiwa
zöpu (Tib. {mdzod spu]): see dzőpu
zungkyi gyelpö {Tib. aakarh 945 84Tkurznavala (gzungs kyi dbang phyug rgyal pos
zhus pa'i mdo), Skt. Dharanishvararaja-sūtra or Tathāgatamaha-karunanirdesa-
sutra): The Sutra Requested by King Dharanishvara
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Tibetan Words & Phrases
366



Index
32 major marks, 3, 17, 65, 89, 133, 181, 193, 221, 278, 307, 308; how Buddha
transcends the 32 major marks, 62; masculine and feminine, 312; the third paradox of
how the 32 major marks exist within ordinary beings, 35; why a lock of Buddha's hair is
an uncompounded phenomenon, 67
37-fold Bodhisattva path, 187
abhidharma, 289
Abhisamaya-alamkara, 8
action/function: 4th aspect of Buddha-nature, 40, 48
activity, 39
aggregates, 56, 58; how dharmakaya has no aggregates, 47
aggression, 103
all-pervasive: gth aspect of Buddha-nature, 41, 52
Ananda, 210
animal, 221
Arhat, 31, 102, 167, 283
Arjuna, 59
aromatherapy, 127
arrogance, 122
Arya, 22, 62
Aryadeva, 2, 133
Asanga, 8, 318
aspiration, 186
astrology, 292
atiyoga, 88, 115, 291. See also mahasandhi
Avalokiteshvara, 236, 295, 349
awareness, 150
ayatanas, 56, 58, 59; an animate being must have 12 ayatanas, 289
beauty, 175, 307; inconceivable, 133; insatiable beauty, 133
beyond aspiration, 5
bhumi, 65. See also Bodhisattva; eighth bhumi, 63; ninth bhumi, 64; tenth bhumi, 64
bimpa, 35
birth, 76
blessings, 100
blindness, 112
blissful: dharmakaya, 45
Bodh Gaya, 260
Bodhicharyavatara, 1, 45, 274
bodhicitta, 76; firm bodhicitta, the challenge for Mahayana practitioners, 272
Bodhisattva, 24, 60, 102; four postures (walking, standing, sitting, sleeping), 64; how
Bodhisattvas are free from karma and emotion, 60; how Bodhisattvas transcend all
extremes, 47; how ordinary beings cannot differentiate between Buddhas and tenth
bhumi Bodhisattvas, 66; tenth bhumi, 31, 66, 178; why Bodhisattvas don't fear samsara,
body: how the body is unclean, 45
Brahma, 229, 239, 240, 263
bubble houses, 238
Buddha, 16. See 32 major marks; 84,000 teachings, 38; body of the Buddha, 38;
body/form of the Buddha, 62, 138; Buddha is emptiness, 27; Buddha is not a
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Index
367



phenomenon, 88; eight qualities, 18; five Buddha families, 297; four things that
followers of the Buddha must let people know, 10; perfection of elimination, 130; six
qualities, 18; supreme among bipeds, 22; the benefits of contemplating, 206; three
miracle powers, 230; why manifestation Buddha can't be too ordinary, 65
Buddha-nature: 10th aspect, inseparable, 41, 70; 1st aspect, essence, 40, 41; 2nd aspect,
cause, 40, 42; 3rd aspect, result, 40, 44; 4th aspect, action/function, 40, 48; $$ aspect,
container, 49, 5th aspect, possessor/endowment, 40; 6th aspect, entry, 41, 50; 7th
aspect, occasions, 41, 51; 8th aspect, all-pervasive, 41, 52; 9th aspect, unchanging, 41,
53; beyond the comprehension of our ordinary mind, 68; does not exist, 119; five
reasons why Buddha-nature was taught, 118; four names for Buddha-nature, 71; how
Buddha-nature is beyond compounded and uncompounded, 88; how Buddha-nature is
wrapped by defilements, 78; how ordinary beings misunderstand it, 51; the benefit of
hearing about Buddha-nature, 124; the ten aspects, 40; why is Buddha-nature
permanent and unchanging?, 70
buffalo, 231
Burma, 248
cause: 2nd aspect of Buddha-nature, 40, 42
Chakrasamvara, 309
chakravartin, 95, 106, 112, 140; 32 similar major marks, 196
chaktok, 22, 157
Chandrakirti, 2, 4, 8, 76, 274, 319
change: dramatic and non-dramatic, 238
cheese grater, 156, 185
Chengdu, 276
chimpanzee, 289
Chinese bamboo painting, 209
Chittamatrin, 9
Chögyam Trungpa Rinpoche, 349
Cindy Crawford, 264
cinema, 77
clairvoyance: five types, 50
clarity, 78, 130; cognition and omniscience, 87; emphasising the clarity aspect of Buddha-
nature, 117
clean: dharmakaya, 45; why the window has never experienced dirt, 46
clouds, 215, 232
cognitive obscurations, 155, 274
cognizer, 38; not inanimate but not animate, 39; without object, 39
commonsense, 220
communication: between sublime beings and beings on the path, 65
compassion, 14; how compassion is like a nurse, 44; like the wind, 215; why Bodhisattvas
Crave for sentient beings, 47
concept, 23
container: 5 aspect of Buddha-nature, 49
continuum, 5
cosmology: Buddhist cosmology, 65
crazy wisdom, 253
crow, 248
cuckoo, 227
cymbals, 228
death, 76, 175
defilements. See emotions; how Buddha-nature is wrapped by defilements, 78
Devadatta, 88, i70, 208, 283
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Index
368



devotion, 28; a mind beyond extremes, 113; the only way to understand Buddha-nature,
113; three kinds (rational, irrational, beyond-rational), 169
Dharma, 20; beyond four kinds of imputation, 22; four different kinds of Dharma to dispel
four obscurations, 43; how does Dharma benefit us?, 22; six qualities, 21; the benefits
of contemplating, 207; two kinds, 134; two truths that define Dharma, 21; ultimate
Dharma is absence of attachment, 31; what is real Dharma?, 22; why Dharma is not
ultimate object of refuge, 31
Dharmadhatu, 26, 36
dharmakaya, 15, 40; 32 qualities, 181; blissful, 45; clean, 45; five qualities, 158; only
undeceptive object of refuge, 67; permanent, 45; self, 45; two kinds, 108; when kham is
referred to as dharmakaya, 46
dhatus, 56, 58, 288
Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, 196, 275
Dipamkara, 198
discipline, 142
disposition, 185
dog's tooth, 260
Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen, 9
draldrey, 4, 23, 28, 62; adventitious defilements are removable, 117; as safest way to talk
about tathagatagarbha, 39; essence of Buddhist path, 99; the result of elimination
cannot be removed, 54; two kinds, 134
dualism, 274
Dudjom Rinpoche, 182, 253
dzogchen, 115, 253, 304. See mahasandhi
earth, 252
echo, 250
eclipse, 136
effortlessness, 254, 321; how Bodhisattvas benefit beings effortlessly, 63
eighteen distinctive qualities, 181, 191
eighteen uncommon qualities. See eighteen distinctive qualities
element. See kham
elements, 203; how the aggregates and emotions correspond to the elements, 58; how
the elements depend on each other, 56
elephant, 100, 120, 123, 136, 278, 290, 329; dreaming about an elephant, 56; is a
mirage, 120; with grinding machine, 308
emotions, 15, 98, 119, 135, 145; are temporary, 151; rangtong and shentong views, 98
emptiness, 4, 27; 10 aspects of Buddha-nature as real meaning of emptiness, 41; and
Buddha-nature, 116; and interdependence, 116; emptiness is form, 45; function of
emptiness is Buddha activity, 39; how the Mahayana understanding goes beyond the
Shravakayana, 86; how we practice emptiness and achieve emptiness, 71; negation of
true existence, 85; not like the exhaustion of a fire, 38; parts and whole, 86; qualities of
emptiness, 36; uninterrupted wisdom, 38; why emptiness, Buddha-nature, dharmakaya,
enlightenment. See Fifth Vajra Point; 15 qualities, 147; clarifying meaning, 150; different
names for, 160; explained in eight points, 130; meaning of changchub, 152; two
different kinds of enlightenment, 72
enthusiasm, 124
entry: 6th aspect of Buddha-nature, 41, 50
essence: 1" aspect of Buddha-nature, 40, 41
eternalist, 4, 36
example: animal, 136; Brahma (#4), 239; Buddha and the lotus (#1), 79; chakravartin and
the woman (#8), 95; cloud (#3), example for Buddha's mind, 232; clouds, example for
defilements, 215; dharmakaya as only example for dharmakaya, 109; dirty window,
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Index 369



example for dharmakaya, 72; dirty window, example for draldrey, 3, 28, 33, 51; earth
(#9), 252; echo (#7), 250; elephant, 136; four supreme animals (elephant, lion, water
buffalo and unicorn), examples for Buddha, 136; gold and the filth (#4), 83; golden
image and the clay mould (#9), 96; grain and the husk (#3), 82; hand and moisturizer,
example for belief in true existence, 86; heavenly drum (#2), example for Buddha's
speech, 225; honey and the bees (#2), 81; how the Nine Examples correspond to the
four stages of the path, 102; how the Nine Examples correspond to the obscurations,
101; how the Nine Examples relate to the three aspects of Buddha-nature (dharmakaya,
thatness, and kham), 107; how the Nine Examples show Buddha manifests without
intention, 254; how the Nine Examples symbolise the nine meanings, 256; how the nine
meanings surpass the Nine Examples, 261; how there is no example for the three kayas,
176; importance of the Nine Examples for Mahayana and tantric practitioners, 88;
Indra's reflection on the lapis lazuli floor (#1), example for Buddha's body, 217; iron
meathooks, example for chaktok, 22; king and the painters, example for completion of
all Buddha qualities, 73; lake covered with lotuses, example for enlightenment, 135;
lamp, as example for fifth aspect of Buddha-nature, 49; lion, 136; lion, example for
four fearlessnesses, 182, 187; lotus growing in water, example for how Buddha
manifests without moving from the worldly state, 63; Nine Examples (of essence and
defilements), 78; Nine Examples of Buddha's activity, 216; ocean, as example for fifth
aspect of Buddha-nature, 49; ocean, example for Buddha's compassion and wisdom,
66; ocean, example for ten bhumis, 214; Rahula and the moon, example for
enlightenment, 136; reflection of autumn moon in water, example for 32 major marks,
199; shoot and the fruit-skin (#6), 92; sky without clouds, example for enlightenment,
136; sky, example for eighteen distinctive qualities, 193; sky, example for eighteen
uncommon qualities, 182; sky, example for unchanging cause, 42; space (#8), 251;
space, example for enlightenment, 215; statue and the tattered rag (#7), 93; sun (#5),
242; sun and its rays, example for inseparable aspect of Buddha-nature, 70; sun,
example for two accumulations, 214; the treasure and the earth (#5), 90; treasure mine,
example for sentient beings, 215; unicorn, 136; vajra, example for ten powers, 182,
184; washing a dirty window, example for dharmakaya, 72; washing a dirty window,
example for draldrey, 3, 28, 33, 51; washing a shirt, example for draldrey, 265; water
and ice, example for inseparability, 41; water buffalo, 136; water in a cow's footprint,
example for Bodhisattva's compassion and wisdom, 66; why the Nine Examples are
taught in sequence, 263; why the Nine Examples were taught to remove students'
doubts, 253; wind, example for compassion, 215; wishfulfilling jewel (#6), 247;
wishfulfilling jewel, example for dharmakaya, 140; wishfulfilling jewel, example for
second aspect of Buddha-nature, 42
existentialist, 237
extremes, 36
extremist, 43
fasting, 88
Ferrari, 207
fire: the three kinds of fire (sickness, old age and death), 55; three kinds of fire, 59
five Buddha families, 6
five elements. See elements
form, 276
four fearlessnesses, 181, 186
Four Noble Truths, 154, 187, 236, 239
four paradoxes, 34
four points: of the Uttaratantra, 269
four postures. See Bodhisattva
four seals, 167, 188; how they define Buddhism, 189
four sounds, 188. See four seals
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Index
370



four supreme animals. See supreme animals
four things that followers of Gautama must let people know, 10
freedom, 76; applying discipline to find freedom, 77; why practicing freedom is so
difficult, 76
Gampopa, 227, 275
Garab Dorje, 2, 303, 354
generalisation, 7, 153, 184
generosity, 270
Gorampa, 9
grinding machine, 308
Gucci shoes, 221
Guru Rinpoche, 170, 175, 248, 325, 326
Guru Yoga, 29
habitual patterns, 102, 105
hand: lack of true existence, 86
happiness, 90; different definitions, 264; what is happiness?, 236
harsh sensation, 156
heruka, 208
Hevajra, 309
Hindu, 310, 314
homeopathy, 77
humility, 253
hungry ghosts, 235
idea, 23; what makes something a good idea?, 23
ignorance, 104
impermanence, 76, 172
inconceivable, 89, 191, 277; six reasons why the Buddha is inconceivable, 178
Indian classical music, 254
Indra, 135, 224, 229; Indra's reflection on the lapis lazuli floor, 217
Indrabhuti, 248
inexhaustible, 67; three causes for inexhaustible Buddha activity, 216
inseparable: 10th aspect of Buddha-nature, 41, 70
interdependence: and emptiness, 116
interdependent arising, 38
iron hooks, 22
Jamgön Kongtrül, 99, 275, 326; Go along with whatever happens in your life, 76
Jamyang Khyentse, 275
jasmine, 243
jewel, 41
Jigme Lingpa, 191, 227, 291
jñana, 13, 294
karma, 58, 184; why karma is like a dream and not like a god, 120
kaya, 108; reason for three kayas, 160; the three qualities of the two kayas, 143; two
accumulations, 38
kham, 6; four causes that actualise the kham, 42; how kham is clean, self, bliss and
permanent, 45; referred to as dharmakaya, 46; the four obscurations that wrap the
kham, 43
Kharak Gomchung, 227
Khenpo Appey Rinpoche, 295
Krishna, 59
Krishnamurti, 27
kumuta flower, 242
Kunzang Lama'i Shelung, 227, 260
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Index
371



lamp, 49
liberation, 73
lion, 136
Lion's Roar, 28, 61, 88
Loden Sherab, 286
Lodrötenpa, 287
Longchehpa, 37, 297, 324
loving-kindness, 124
luminosity, 9, 59
Madhyamakavatara, 1, 8, 178, 274, 287, 322
Madhyamika, 9, 85, 89, 133, 151, 269, 293
mahasandhi, 31, 38, 39, 41, 98, 320; cannot be meditated upon, 148
Mahayana, 5; how enthusiasm for the Mahayana is like a seed, 44; merit to understand,
76; the path that extracts, 213
major marks. See 32 major marks
mango, 92
manifestation, 88
Manjushri, 236
Maudgalyayana, 308
melancholy, 172
merit, 88; how merit improves our understanding of Dharma, 113; merit to enjoy food,
114
Milarepa, 275, 309
mind: mind training, 45; nature of mind, 89; no truly existing mind, 86; why clarity and
cognition is wisdom not mind, 87
Mipham Rinpoche, 3, 31, 36, 67; using astrology to piece a stone with grass, 292; why
Buddha-nature is not the cause of wrong views, 56; why clarity and cognition is wisdom
not mind, 87; why lack of true existence is not the same as Buddha-nature, 86
moisturiser cream, 237
monsoon, 232
motivation, 76
Mulamadhyamikakarika, 27, 305
music, 229
Nagarjuna, 1, 2, 4, 27, 72, 133, 301, 305, 318; Praise to Mahakali, 278; praise to the
Buddha, 307
Nanda: story of Nanda, 210
Narayana, 198
nature of mind, 115
Ngawang Chödrak, 299
nihilist, 4, 19, 27, 36
nine examples (of essence and defilements), 78
nirmanakaya, 159; as manifestation, 88; Shakyamuni's life story, 164
nirodha, 187
nirvana, 71; as realisation of Buddha-nature, 40; two kinds of nirvana, 87; what is
nirvana?, 73; why Bodhisattvas do not dwell in nirvana, 47
nyagrodha, 198
Nyoshul Khen Rinpoche, 22, 114, 115
occasions: 7th aspect of Buddha-nature, 41, 51; how first six aspects of Buddha-nature
can be categorised in terms of three occasions, 52; three occasions (impure, both
impure and pure, pure), 51
ocean, 214; container of enlightened qualities, 49
Orgyen Tobgyal Rinpoche, 208
painters: example of the king and the painters, 73
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Index 372



paramita, 45, 147, 222, 296; example of the painters, 75
paranoia, 127; enlightenment as the absence of paranoia, 89
parinirvana, 10, 87
parts, 86
passion, 103, 123
path: path language, 37; why the path is difficult, 65
Patrul Rinpoche, 245, 261, 272, 288, 318
peaceful, 68, 153; non-dualism, 141
permanent, 135, 141, 149, 173; dharmakaya, 45
pigeon, 287
pizza, 176
planning, 76
possessor/endowment: 5th aspect of Buddha-nature, 40
pramana, 261
prayer, 118, 155
primordially pure, 32, 111, 128; dharmakaya, 46
projection, 290
prostration, 260
pure perception, 294
purification: absolute purification, 73; how purification and accumulation come together,
75; perfection of, 131
qualities. See Sixth Vajra Point; 64 Buddha qualities, 180
Rahula, 136
rationality, 151, 215
Ratnavajra, 286
realisation: perfection of, 131
Rechungpa, 309
refuge, 29, 175; why a compounded phenomenon cannot be an unfailing object of refuge,
67
rein, 231
relaxation, 90
religion, 77, 188, 269; how god is inconceivable, 151; permanence of god, 141; view and
methods, 129
renunciation, 206, 216, 249; basis for understanding the dharma, 76
result: 314 aspect of Buddha-nature, 40, 44
result of elimination, 3. See draldrey
Saddam Hussein, 236
Sadzana, 286
sakchey, 145. See emotions
Sakya Pandita, 9, 261
saliva, 145
samadhi, 211, 263; how samadhi is like a womb, 44
sambhogakaya: five qualities, 159
samsara: equality of samsara and nirvana, 37; how do we realise that samsara is
suffering?, 48
sandcastle, 2, 236
Sangha, 24; creating division in the Sangha, 283; the benefits of contemplating, 207
Saraswati, 229, 240
Sautrantika, 85
second turning, 117
self: dharmakaya, 45
self-awareness, 7, 13, 26
selflessness, 44; how dharmakaya is beyond selflessness, 46
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Index 373



sentient beings: three kinds of beings (ordinary beings, sublime beings on the path,
Buddhas, 51
Seven Branch Offering, 208
seven vajra points, 6
Shakyamuni, 38, 226; his life story according to the common vehicle and the Mahayana,
87; life story, 164, 165
shamatha, 224
Shantarakshita, 85
Shantideva, 1, 208, 274
Shariputra, 208, 209, 334
shastra, 280
shirt: example of washing a dirty shirt, 265
Shiva, 135, 349
show, 88
Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, 26, 31, 43, 102, 149, 191, 193, 203, 231
Shravakayana, 45, 186; emptiness in the Shravakayana, 86
shunyata, 64
Siddhartha, 5, 362
skandhas, 56, 58
sky: example of, 42
space, 251; how the stainless space is divided into four categories, 71; quality of the
space within three different containers is the same, 53
spontaneous, 209, 231; spontaneous presence, 301
Sri Lanka, 88, 231; monks, 115
stainless space, 52, 53, 131
Sthiramati, 287
stone: does a stone have Buddha-nature, 37; has no Buddha-nature, 86
suffering, 237; how dharmakaya has no suffering, 47
sun, 214, 242
supplication, 208; why motivation to clean window is like a supplication, 42
supreme animals, 221
sutra: Abhidharma-sutra, 279; Avatamsaka-sutra, 279; Bhadrakalpa-sutra, 118;
Dashabhumika-sutra, 279; Dharanishvararaja-sutra, 8; Diamond Sutra, 62; Heart sutra,
45, 153; Inexpressible Qualities of the Tathagata, 10; Jñanaloka-sutra, 254;
Lankavatara-sutra, 156; Mahaparinirvana-sutra, 11, 279, 292; Prajñaparamita-sutra, 1,
2, 3, 4, 8, 17, 41, 117, 121, 236, 279, 287, 325; Pundarika-sutra, 167; Ratnadarika-
sutra, 198; Shrimaladevisimhanada-sutra, 10; Sutra Exposing the Superior Mind, 10;
Sutra of Great Compassion, 279; Sutra of No increasing and No Decreasing, 10; Sutra of
the Fortunate Aeon, 118; Sutra Requested by Matisagara, 279; Tathagatamaha-
karunanirdesa-sutra, 10; teldrip mepa, 10; when Buddha sacrificed his kingdom for one
word of wisdom, 114
svabhavikakaya, 112
Swetaketu, 165
Tao-shen, 292
tathagatagarbha, 26, 39, 52, 296
teacher: looking for a teacher, 249
ten powers, 34, 181, 182, 183
Thailand, 248
third turning, 117
three baskets, 6
Three Jewels, 28; as reference point for the path, 27; example of washing a dirty window,
33; four reasons why there are Three Jewels, 33; none other than Buddha-nature, 42;
why the Three jewels are precious, 32
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
374
Index



three poisons, 101
transitory collective, 238
translator's homage, 6
treasure mine, 215
Treasury of Knowledge, 65
two accumulations, 38, 213
unchanging: 9th aspect of Buddha-nature, 41, 53
uncompounded, 4, 9, 13, 15, 67; how Buddha-nature is beyond compounded and
uncompounded, 88; Three Jewels, 32
unfathomable phenomenon, 268
unicorn, 136
uninterrupted, 211
ushnisha, 77, 89, 133, 181, 198; does not exist, 119; Maudgalyayana's attempt to see the
tip, 308
Vaibhashika, 85
Vairocana Buddha, 17, 277
vajra, 186
Vajra Point: Dharma, 20
vajra-like antidote, 102, 106
Vajrapani, 236
Vajrasattva, 37, 114, 303
Vajrayana, 8
Vajrayogini, 309
Varanasi, 5
Vasubandhu, 287, 289
Vedanta, 46
vegetarian, 292
view: and eating goose liver, 129; blinded by view, 246; primordial purity, 128
vinaya, 9
Virupa, 291, 349
water and ice: example, 41
water buffalo, 136
white elephants, 248
wind, 215
window: example of washing a dirty window, 3, 28, 33, 72; three occasions, 51
wisdom, 14; how wisdom is like a mother, 44; non-conceptual, 132; the two wisdoms, 75,
154
wishfulfilling gem. See wishfulfilling jewel
wishfulfilling jewel, 42, 140, 163, 203, 247, 263
World Cup, 77, 127
wrong views, 209; causes of wrong views, 282; dangers of misinterpreting the Dharma,
281; how wrong views depend on Buddha-nature, 56
yak's horn, 309
Yeshe Tsogyal, 309
yogi, 151, 157, 257
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche - Uttaratantra
Index
375



دید و به فضا مهنة
